The Project Gutenberg eBook, Captures, by John Galsworthy


This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions 
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms of
the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at 
www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States, you'll have
to check the laws of the country where you are located before using this ebook.




Title: Captures


Author: John Galsworthy



Release Date: May 4, 2021  [eBook #65252]

Language: English

Character set encoding: UTF-8


***START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK CAPTURES***


E-text prepared by Tim Lindell, Martin Pettit, and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team (http://www.pgdp.net) from page images generously made
available by Internet Archive (https://archive.org)



Note: Images of the original pages are available through
      Internet Archive. See
      https://archive.org/details/captures00galsuoft





CAPTURES


      *      *      *      *      *      *

BY THE SAME AUTHOR


_Published by William Heinemann_

VILLA RUBEIN
THE ISLAND PHARISEES
THE MAN OF PROPERTY
THE COUNTRY HOUSE
FRATERNITY
THE PATRICIAN
THE DARK FLOWER
THE FREELANDS
BEYOND
FIVE TALES
SAINT’S PROGRESS
IN CHANCERY
TO LET

THE FORSYTE SAGA

A COMMENTARY
A MOTLEY
THE INN OF TRANQUILLITY
A SHEAF
ANOTHER SHEAF
TATTERDEMALION

MOODS, SONGS, AND DOGGERELS

ADDRESSES IN AMERICA

MEMORIES. Illustrated by Maud Earl
AWAKENING. Illustrated by R. H. Sauter.


_Issued by other Publishers_

PLAYS: Six Vols.

      *      *      *      *      *      *


CAPTURES

by

JOHN GALSWORTHY


   “Soft and fair, Gentlemen, never look for birds of
   this year in the nests of the last.”--DON QUIXOTE.


[Illustration: 1923]






London: William Heinemann Ltd.

First published 1923

Printed in Great Britain by
Billing and Sons, Ltd., Guildford and Esher

[All rights reserved]




TO

R. H. SAUTER




CONTENTS

                             PAGE
A FEUD                          1

THE MAN WHO KEPT HIS FORM      55

A HEDONIST                     77

TIMBER                         90

SANTA LUCIA                   106

BLACKMAIL                     127

THE BROKEN BOOT               147

STROKE OF LIGHTNING           155

VIRTUE                        176

CONSCIENCE                    190

SALTA PRO NOBIS               202

PHILANTHROPY                  210

A LONG-AGO AFFAIR             217

ACME                          224

LATE--299                     235

HAD A HORSE                   268




CAPTURES




A FEUD


I

Its psychic origin, like that of most human loves and hates, was
obscure, and yet, like most human hates and loves, had a definite point
of physical departure--the moment when Bowden’s yellow dog bit Steer’s
ungaitered leg. Even then it might not have ‘got going’ as they say,
but for the village sense of justice which caused Steer to bring his
gun next day and solemnly execute the dog. He was the third person the
dog had bitten; and not even Bowden, who was fond of his whippet, could
oppose the execution, but the shot left him with an obscure feeling
of lost property, a vague sense of disloyalty to his dog. Steer was
a Northerner, an Easterner, a man from a part called Lincolnshire,
outlandish, like the Frisian cattle he mixed with the Devons on his
farm--this, Bowden could not help feeling in the bottom of his soul,
was what had moved his dog. Snip had not liked, any more than his
master, that thin, spry, red-grey-bearded chap’s experimental ways of
farming, his habit of always being an hour, a week, a month earlier
than Bowden; had not liked his lean, dry activity, his thin legs, his
east-wind air. Bowden knew that he would have shot Steer’s dog if he
himself had been the third person bitten by it; but then Steer’s dog
had _not_ bitten Bowden, Bowden’s dog _had_ bitten Steer; and this
seemed to Bowden to show that his dog knew what was what. While he was
burying the poor brute he had muttered: “Damn the man! What did he want
trapesin’ about my yard in his Sunday breeks? Seein’ what he could
get, I suppose!” And with each shovel of earth he threw on the limp
yellow body, a sticky resentment had oozed from his spirit and clung,
undissolving, round the springs of its action.

To inter the dog properly was a long, hot job.

‘He comes and shoots my dog, of a Sunday too, and leaves me to bury
’un,’ he thought, wiping his round, well-coloured face; and he spat as
if the ground in front of him were Steer.

When he had finished and rolled a big stone on to the little mound he
went in, and, sitting down moodily in the kitchen, said:

“Girl, draw me a glass o’ cider.” Having drunk it, he looked up and
added: “I’ve a-burried she up to Crossovers.” The dog was male, a
lissome whippet unconnected with the business of the farm, and Bowden
had called him ‘she’ from puppyhood. The dark-haired, broad-faced,
rather sullen-looking girl whom he addressed flushed, and her grey eyes
widened. “’Twas a shame!” she muttered.

“Ah!” said Bowden.

Bowden farmed about a hundred acres of half and half sort of land,
some good, some poor, just under the down. He was a widower, with a
mother and an only son. A broad, easy man with a dark round head, a
rosy face, and immense capacity for living in the moment. Looking at
him you would have said not one in whom things would rankle. But then,
to look at a West Countryman you would say so many things that have
their lurking negations. He was a native of the natives; his family
went back in the parish to times beyond the opening of the register;
his ancestors had been churchwardens in remote days. His father, ‘Daddy
Bowden,’ an easy-going handsome old fellow and a bit of a rip, had
died at ninety. He himself was well over fifty, but had no grey hair
as yet. He took life easily, and let his farm off lightly, keeping it
nearly all to pasture, with a conservative grin (Bowden was a Liberal)
at the outlandish efforts of his neighbour Steer (a Tory) to grow
wheat, bring in Frisian stock, and use newfangled machines. Steer had
originally come to that part of the country as a gentleman’s bailiff,
and this induced a sort of secret contempt in Bowden, whose forefathers
in old days had farmed their own land here round about. Bowden’s
mother, eighty-eight years old, was a little pocket woman almost past
speech, with dark bright eyes and innumerable wrinkles, who sat all
day long in any warmth there was, conserving energy. His son Ned, a
youth of twenty-four, bullet-headed like all the Bowdens, was of a
lighter colour in hair and eyes; and at the moment of history, when
Steer shot Bowden’s dog, he was keeping company with Steer’s niece,
Molly Winch, who kept house for the confirmed bachelor that Steer was.
The other member of Bowden’s household, the girl Pansy, was an orphan,
some said born under a rose, who came from the other side of the moor
and earned fourteen pounds a year. She kept to herself, had dark fine
hair, grey eyes, a pale broad face; ‘broody’ she was, given somewhat
to the ‘tantrums’; now she would look quite plain; then, when moved
or excited, quite pretty. Hers was all the housework, and much of the
poultry-feeding, wood-cutting and water-drawing. She was hard worked
and often sullen because of it.

Having finished his cider, Bowden stood in the kitchen porch looking
idly at a dance of gnats. The weather was fine, and the hay was in.
It was one of those intervals between harvests which he was wont to
take easy, and it would amuse him to think of his neighbour always
‘puzzivantin’’ over some ‘improvement’ or other. But it did not amuse
him this evening. That chap was for ever trying to sneak ahead of his
neighbours, and had gone and shot his dog! He caught sight of his son
Ned, who had just milked the cows and was turning them down the lane.
Now the lad would ‘slick himself up’ and go courting that niece of
Steer’s. The courtship seemed to Bowden suddenly unnatural. A cough
made him conscious of the girl Pansy standing behind him with her
sleeves rolled up.

“Butiful evenin’,” he said, “gude for the corn.” When Bowden indulged
his sense of the æsthetic, he would, as it were, apologise with some
comment that implied commercial benefit or loss; while Steer would pass
on with only a dry ‘Fine evenin’.’ In talking with Steer one never
lost consciousness of his keen ‘on-the-makeness,’ as of a progressive
individualist who has nothing to cover his nature from one’s eyes.
Bowden one might meet for weeks without realising that beneath his
uncontradictious pleasantry was a self-preservative individualism
quite as stubborn. To the casual eye Steer was much more up-to-date and
‘civilised’; to one looking deeper, Bowden had been ‘civilised’ much
longer. He had grown protective covering in a softer climate or drawn
it outward from an older strain of blood.

“The gnats are dancin’,” he said, “fine weather”; and the girl Pansy
nodded. Watching her turn the handle of the separator, he marked her
glance straying down the yard to where Ned was shutting the lane gate.
She was a likely-looking wench with her shapely browned arms and her
black hair, fine as silk, which she kept brushing back from her eyes
with her free hand. It gave him a kind of farmyard amusement to see
those eyes of hers following his son about. ‘She’s Ned’s if he wants
her--young hussy!’ he thought. ‘Begad, but it would put Steer’s nose
out of joint properly if that girl got in front of his precious niece.’
To say that this thought was father to a wish would too definitely
express the circumambulatory mind of Bowden--a lazy and unprecise
thinker; but it lurked and hovered when he took his ash-plant and
browsed his way out of the yard to have a look at the young bull
before supper. At the meadow of water-weed and pasture, where the
young red bull was grazing, he stood leaning over the gate, with
the swallows flying high. The young bull was ‘lukin’ up bravely’--in
another year he would lay over that bull of Steer’s. Ah! he would that!
And a dim savagery stirred in Bowden; then passed in the sensuous
enjoyment--which a farmer never admits--at the scent, sight, sounds,
of his fields in fine weather, at the blue above and the green beneath
him, the gleam of that thread of water, half smothered in bulrushes,
‘daggers,’ and monkey flower, under the slowly sinking sun, at the
song of a lark, and the murmuring in the ash-trees, at the glistening
ruddy coat of the young bull and the sound of his cropping! Three
rabbits ran into the hedge. So that fellow had shot his dog--his dog
that had nipped up more rabbits out of corn than any dog he ever owned!
He tapped his stick on the gate. The young bull raised a lazy head,
gazed at his master, and, flicking his tail at the flies, resumed his
pasturing.

‘Shot my dog!’ thought Bowden; ‘shot my dog! Yu wait a bit!’


II

The girl Pansy turned the handle of the separator, and its whining
drone mixed with the thoughts and feelings, poignant yet formless, of
one who had little say in her own career. There was an ache in her
loins, for hay harvest was ever a hard week; and an ache in her heart,
because she had no leisure, like Molly Winch and other girls, who could
find time for the piano and to make their dresses. She touched her
hard frieze skirt. She was sick of the ugly thing. And she hastened
the separator. She had to feed the calves and set the supper before
she could change into her Sunday frock and go to evening church--her
one weekly festivity. Ned Bowden! Her fancy soared to the monstrous
extravagance of herself and Ned walking across the fields to church
together, singing out of one hymn-book; Ned who had given her a look
when he passed just now as if he realised at last that she had been
thinking of him for weeks. A dusky flush crept up in her pale cheeks.
A girl must think of somebody--she wasn’t old Mother Bowden, with her
hands on her lap all day, in sunlight or fire-shine, content just to
be warm! And she turned the handle with a sort of frenzy. Would the
milk never finish running through? Ned never saw her in her frock--her
frock sprigged with cornflowers; he went off too early to his courting,
Sunday evenings. In this old skirt she looked so thick and muddy. And
her arms---- Gazing despairingly at arms browned and roughened her
fancy took another monstrous flight. She saw herself and Molly Winch
side by side ungarbed. Ah! She would make two of that Molly Winch! The
thought at once pained and pleased her. It was genteel to be thin and
elegant; and yet--instinct told her--strength and firmness of flesh
had been desirable before ever gentility existed. She let the handle
go, and, lifting the pail of ‘waste,’ hurried down with it to the dark
byre, whence the young calves were thrusting their red muzzles. She
pushed them back in turn--greedy little things--smacking their wet
noses, scolding them. Ugh! How mucky it was in there--they ought to
give that byre a good clean up! Banging down the empty pail, she ran to
set out supper on the long deal table. In the last of the sunlight old
Mother Bowden’s bright eyes seemed to watch her inhumanly. She would
never be done in time--never be done in time!

The beef, the cider, the cheese, the bread, the pickles--what else?
Lettuce! Yes, and it wasn’t washed, and Bowden loved his lettuce.
But she couldn’t wait--she couldn’t! Perhaps he’d forget it--if she
put some cream out! From the cool, dark dairy, down the little stone
passage, she fetched the remains of the scalded cream.

“Watch the cat, Missis Bowden!” And she ran up the wriggling narrow
stairs.

The room she slept in was like a ship’s cabin--no bigger. She drew the
curtain over the porthole-like window, tore off her things and flung
them on the narrow bed. This was her weekly change. There was a hole
in her undergarment, and she tore it wider in her hurry. ‘I won’t have
time for a good wash,’ she thought. Taking her one towel, she damped
it, rubbed it over her, and began to dress furiously. The church bell
had begun its dull, hard single chime. The little room was fiery hot,
and beads of sweat stood on the girl’s brow. Savagely she thought:
‘Why can’t I have time to be cool, like Molly Winch?’ A large spider,
a little way out from one corner of the ceiling, seemed watching her,
and she shuddered. She couldn’t bear spiders--great hairy things! But
she had no time to stretch up her hand and kill it. Glancing through
a chink left by the drawn curtain to see whether Ned had come down
into the yard, she snatched up her powder puff--precious possession,
nearest approach to gentility--and solemnly rubbed it over face and
neck. She wouldn’t shine, anyway! Under her Sunday hat, a broad-brimmed
straw, trimmed with wide-eyed artificial daisies, she stood a moment
contemplating her image in a mirror the size of her two hands. The
scent of the powder, as of gone-off violets, soothed her nerves. But
why was her hair so fine that it wouldn’t stay in place? And why black,
instead of goldeny brown like Molly Winch’s hair? Her lip drooped,
her eyes looked wide and mournful in the glass. She snatched up her
pair of dirty white cotton gloves, took her prayer-book, threw open
the door, and stood listening. Dead silence in the house. Ned Bowden’s
room, his father’s, his old grandmother’s were up the other stairs.
She would have liked him to see her coming down--like what the young
men did in the magazines, looking up at the young ladies beautiful
and cool, descending slowly. But would he look at her when he had his
best on, going to Molly Winch? She went down the wriggling staircase.
Gnats were still dancing outside the porch, ducks bathing and preening
their feathers in sunlight which had lost all sting. She did not sit
down for fear of being caught too obviously waiting, but stood changing
from tired foot to foot, while the scent of powder mingled queerly with
the homely odour of the farmyard and the lingering perfume of the hay
stacked up close by. The bell stopped ringing. Should she wait? Perhaps
he wasn’t going to church at all; just going to sit with Molly Winch,
or to walk in the lanes with her. Oh, no! That Molly Winch was too prim
and proper; she wouldn’t miss church! And suddenly something stirred
within the girl. What would she not miss for a walk in the lanes with
Ned? It wasn’t fair! Some people had everything! The sound of heavy
boots from stair to stair came to her ears, and more swiftly than one
would have thought natural to that firm body she sped through the
yard and passed through the door in its high wall to the field path.
Scarcely more than a rut, it was strewn with wisps of hay, for they
had not yet raked this last field, and the air smelled very sweet. She
dawdled, every sense throbbing, aware of his approach behind her, its
measured dwelling on either foot which no Bowden could abandon, even
when late for church. He ranged up; his hair was greased, his square
figure stuffed handsome into board-like Sunday dittoes. His red face
shone from soap, his grey eyes shone from surplus energy. From head
to foot he was wonderful. Would he pass her or fall in alongside? He
fell into step. The girl’s heart thumped, her cheeks burned under the
powder, so that the scent thereof was released. Young Bowden’s arm,
that felt like iron, bumped her own, and at the thrill which went
through her she half-closed her eyes.

“I reckon we’re tu late,” he said.

Her widened eyes challenged his stare.

“Don’t you want to see Molly Winch, then?”

“No, I don’t want any words about that dog.”

Quick to see her chance, the girl exclaimed:

“Ah! ’Twas a shame--it was, but she’d think more of her uncle’s leg
than of ’im, I know.”

Again his arm pressed hers. He said: “Let’s go down into the brake.”

The bit of common land below the field was high with furze, where a few
brown-gold blossoms were still clinging. A late cuckoo called shrilly
from an ash-tree below. The breeze stirred a faint rustling out of the
hedgerow trees. Young Bowden sat down among the knee-high bracken that
smelled of sap and put his arm about her.


III

In parishes with scattered farms and no real village, gossip has not
quite its proper wings; and the first intimation Steer had that his
niece was being slighted came from Bowden himself. Steer was wont to
drive the seven miles to market in a small spring cart filled with
produce on the journey in, and with groceries on the journey out,
holding his east-wind face, fixing his eyes on the ears of his mare.
His niece sometimes sat beside him--one of those girls whose china
is a little too thin for farm life. She was educated, and played the
piano. Steer was proud of her in spite of his low opinion of her
father, who had died of consumption and left Steer’s sister in poor
circumstances. Molly Winch’s face, indeed, had refinement; it coloured
easily a faint rose pink, was pointed in the chin, had a slightly
tip-tilted nose, and pretty truthful eyes--a nice face.

Steer’s mare usually did the seven miles in just under forty minutes,
and he was proud of her, especially when she overhauled Bowden’s mare.
The two spring carts travelled abreast of each other just long enough
for these words to be exchanged:

“Mornin’, Bowden!”

“Mornin’! Mornin’, Miss Molly, ’aven’t seen yu lately; thought yu were
visitin’!”

“No, Mr. Bowden.”

“Glad to see yu lukin’ up s’well. Reckon Ned’s tu busy elsewhere just
now.”

It was then that Steer’s mare drew well ahead.

‘My old mare’s worth two of his,’ he thought.

Bowden’s cart was distant dust before he turned to his niece and said:

“What’s the matter with Ned Bowden. When did you see him last?”

His shrewd light eyes noted her lips quivering, and the stain on her
cheeks.

“It’s--it’s a month now.”

“Is it--is it?” was all Steer said. But he flicked the mare sharply
with his whip, thinking: ‘What’s this? Didn’t like that fellow’s
face--was he makin’ game of us?’

Steer was an abstemious man; a tot of sloe gin before he embarked for
home was the extent of his usual potations at ‘The Drake.’ But that day
he took two tots because of the grin on the face of Bowden, who would
sit an hour and more after he had gone, absorbing gin and cider. Was
that grin meant for him and for his niece?

A discreet man, too, he let a fortnight pass while he watched out. Ned
Bowden did not come to church, nor was he seen at Steer’s. Molly looked
pale and peaky. And something deep stirred in Steer. ‘If he don’t mean
to keep his word to her,’ he thought, ‘I’ll have the law of him, young
pup!’

People talked no more freely to Steer than he to them; and another week
had passed before he had fresh evidence. It came after a parish meeting
from the schoolmistress, a grey-haired, single lady, much respected.

“I don’t like Molly looking so pale and daverdy, Mr. Steer. I’m
grieved about Ned Bowden, I thought he was a steady boy.”

“What about him?”

“That girl at Bowden’s.”

Steer flopped into the depths of consciousness. So everybody round
had known, maybe for weeks, that his niece was being jilted for that
cross-bred slut; known, and been grinning up their sleeves, had they?
And that evening he announced:

“I’m goin’ round to Bowden’s, Molly.”

She coloured, then went pale.

“They shan’t put it up on you,” he said, “I’ll see to that. Give me
that ring of his--I may want it.”

Molly Winch silently slipped off her amethyst engagement ring, and gave
it him.

Steer put on his best hat, breeches and gaiters, took a thin stick, and
set out.

Corn harvest was coming near, and he crossed a field of his own wheat
into a field of Bowden’s oats. Steer was the only farmer round about
who grew wheat. Wheat! In Bowden’s view it was all his politics! But
Steer was thinking: ‘My wheat’s lookin’ well--don’t think much of
these oats’ (another of his ‘foreign expressions’; oats were ‘corn’ to
Bowden). ‘He’ll have no straw.’

He had not been in Bowden’s yard since the day he executed the yellow
whippet dog, and his calf twitched--the brute had given it a shrewd nip.

The girl Pansy opened the door to him. And, seeing the flush rise into
her pale cheeks, he thought: ‘If I were to lay my stick across your
back you’d know it, my girl.’

Bowden had just finished his supper of bacon, beans and cider, and was
smoking his pipe before the embers of a wood fire. He did not get up,
and there seemed to Steer something studied and insulting in the way he
nodded to a chair. He sat down with his stick across his knees, while
the girl went quickly out.

“Butiful evenin’,” said Bowden. “Fine weather for the corn. Drink o’
cider?”

Steer shook his head. The cautious man was making sure of his
surroundings before he opened fire. Old Mrs. Bowden sat in her chair
by the hearth with her little old back turned to the room. Bowden’s
white-headed bobtail was stretched out with his chin on his paws;
a yellow cat crouched, still as the Sphinx, with half-closed eyes;
nothing else was alive, except the slow-ticking clock.

Steer held up the amethyst ring.

“See this?”

Undisturbed by meaning or emotion, Bowden’s face was turned slowly
towards the ring.

“Ah! What about it?”

“’Twas given to my niece for a purpose. Is that purpose goin’ to be
fulfilled?”

“Tidden for me to say. Ask Ned.”

Steer closed his hand, slightly covered with reddish hairs.

“I’ve heard tales,” he said. “And if he don’ mean to keep his word I’ll
have the law of him. I’ve always thought my niece a sight too good for
him; but if he thinks he can put a slight on her he’s reckonin’ without
the cost--that’s all.”

Bowden blew out a cloud of smoke.

“Ned’s a man grown.”

“Do you abet him?”

Bowden turned his head lazily.

“Don’t you come here bullyin’ me.” And again he puffed out a cloud of
smoke. Its scent increased the resentment in Steer, who was no smoker.

“Like father, like son,” he said. “We know what _your_ father was like.”

Bowden took his pipe from his mouth with a fist the size of a beefsteak.

“With the old lady settin’ there! Get out o’ my house!”

A wave of exasperated blood flooded Steer’s thin cheeks.

“You know right well that she hears naught.”

Bowden replaced his pipe. “’Tes no yuse tachin’ yu manners,” he
muttered.

Something twitched in Steer’s lean throat, where the reddish-grey hair
covered his Adam’s apple.

“I’ll give your son a week; and then look out.”

A chuckle pursued him to the door.

‘All right!’ he thought, ‘we’ll see who’ll laugh last.’


IV

Difficult to say whether morality exists in a man like Bowden, whose
blood is racy of the soil, and whose farmyard is so adjacent. That his
son should run riot with the girl Pansy would have struck him more,
perhaps, if Steer had not shot his dog--the affair so providentially
put that fellow’s nose out of joint. It went far, in fact, to assuage
his outraged sense of property, and to dull the feeling that he had
betrayed his dog by not actively opposing village justice. As for the
‘Law,’ the Bowdens had lived for too many generations in a parish where
no constable was resident to have any real belief in its powers. He
often broke the law himself in a quiet way--shooting stray pheasants
and calling them pigeons; not inspecting his rabbit traps morning and
evening; not keeping quite to date in dipping his sheep, and so forth.
The ‘Law’ could always be evaded. Besides, what law was Ned breaking?
That was Steer’s gup!

He was contemptuously surprised therefore when, three weeks later, Ned
received a document headed ‘High Courts of Justice. Winch _versus_
Bowden.’ It claimed five hundred pounds from him for breach of his
promise of marriage. An outlandish trick, indeed--with the war on too!
Couldn’t Ned please himself as to what girl he’d take? Bowden was for
putting it in the fire. But the more the two examined the document
the more hypnotised they became. Lawyers were no use except to charge
money--but, perhaps, a lawyer ought to have a look at it.

On market day, therefore, they took it to Applewhite of Applewhite and
Carter, who subjected them to a prolonged catechism. Had Ned engaged
himself to the girl? Well, yes, he supposed he had. How had he broken
off the engagement--had he written to the girl? No. Well, had he
received letters from her asking him what was the matter? Yes; two.
Had he answered them? No. Had he seen the girl and done it by word of
mouth? No. He had not seen the girl for ten weeks. Was he prepared to
see the girl or write to her? He was not. Was he ready to marry her?
No. Why was that?

Ned looked at his father; and Bowden looked at Ned. The girl Pansy had
never been mentioned between them.

Mr. Applewhite repeated his question. Ned did not know.

According to the lawyer, if Ned did not know, nobody knew. What had
caused the change in his feelings?

It was Bowden who answered:

“He shot my dog.”

“Who?”

“Steer.”

Mr. Applewhite was unable to see the connection. If that was all, he
was afraid young Mr. Bowden would either have to marry the girl or
‘stand to be shot at’ himself. And suddenly he looked at Ned. “Is there
anything against this girl?” No, there was nothing against her.

“Then why not marry her?”

Again Ned shook his bullet head.

The lawyer smoothed his chin--he was a pleasant fellow, and a good
fisherman.

“About this young lady, Miss Winch; excuse my asking, but I suppose you
haven’t been putting the cart before the horse?”

For the third time Ned shook his head.

No, there had been nothing of that sort. He did not add that if there
had he might not have been overmastered by the propinquity of the girl
Pansy.

“There’s another girl in this, I suppose,” said the lawyer suddenly;
“well, I don’t want to hear. It’s for you to decide what you’ll
do--marry the girl or defend the action and get the damages
reduced--it’s a stiff claim. You and your father had better go away,
talk it over again, and let me know. If you defend, you’ll have to go
up to London. In the box, least said is soonest mended. You’ll simply
say you found you were mistaken, and thought it more honourable to
break off at once than to go on. That sometimes goes down rather well
with juries, if the man looks straightforward.”

The Bowdens went away. Steer passed them on the journey home. He was
alone, driving that mare of his. The Bowdens grinned faintly as he went
by. Then Bowden called out two words:

“Stickin’ plaster!”

If Steer heard he gave no sign, but his ears looked very red.

When his hurrying cart was a speck at the top of the steep rise, Bowden
turned a little towards his son.

“I want to make that chap sweat,” he said.

“Ah!” answered Ned.

But how to make Steer sweat without sweating themselves? That was what
exercised the Bowdens, each according to his lights and circumstances,
which, of course, were very different. Even in this quandary they
did not mention the girl Pansy. To do so would have been to touch on
feeling; both felt it better to keep to facts and to devices. It was
Bowden who put the finishing touch to a long and devious silence.

“If yu don’ du nothin’, Ned, I don’ see how they can ’ave yu. Yu’ve not
putt nothin’ on paper. How’m they to tell yu don’ mean to marry her?
I’d let ’em stew in their own juice. Don’t yu never admit it. Drop word
to that lawyer chap that yu’m not guilty.”

Ned nodded, but underneath his stolidity he could not help feeling that
it was not so simple as all that. By him, though not yet quite tired
of the girl Pansy, his first choice had begun to be faintly desired
again--her refinement ‘in the distance enchanted’ was regaining some of
its attraction to his cooling blood. What would have been the course of
events but for Steer’s next action is, indeed, uncertain.


V

In having the law of ‘those two fellers,’ Steer had passed through an
experience with his niece which had considerably embittered feelings
already acid. The girl had shown a ‘ladylike’ shrinking from pressing
a man who had ceased to want her. There was an absolute difference
between her wishes and her uncle’s. He would not have young Bowden
marry her for anything; he just wanted revenge on the Bowdens.
She wanted young Bowden still; but if she couldn’t get him, would
cry quietly and leave it at that. The two points of view had been
irreconcilable till Steer, taking the bit between his teeth, had
assured his niece that to bring the action was the only way of dragging
young Bowden back to her. This gave him a bad conscience, for he was
fond of his niece, and he really felt that to bring the action would
make that fellow Bowden stick his toes in all the more and refuse to
budge. He thought always of Bowden and of the five hundred that would
come out of _his_ pocket, not out of Ned’s.

Steer owned the local weed-sprayer, which, by village custom, was
at the service of his neighbours in rotation. This year he fetched
the sprayer back from Pethick’s farm just as it was on the point of
going on to Bowden’s without reason given. Bowden, who would not have
been above using ‘that chap’s’ sprayer so long as it came to him from
Pethick in ordinary rotation, was above sending to Steer’s for it. He
took the action as a public proclamation of enmity, and in ‘The Three
Stars Inn,’ where he went nearly every evening for a glass of cider
with a drop of gin and a clove in it, he said out loud that Steer was a
‘colley,’ and Ned wouldn’t be seen dead with that niece of his.

By those words, soon repeated far and wide, he committed his son just
when Ned was cooling rapidly towards the girl Pansy, and beginning to
think of going to church once more and seeing whether Molly wouldn’t
look at him again. After all, it was he, not his father, who would have
to go into the witness-box; moreover, he had nothing against Molly
Winch.

Now that the feud was openly recognised by village tongues, its origin
was already lost. No one--hardly even the Bowdens--remembered that
Bowden’s dog had bitten Steer, and that Steer had shot it; so much
spicier on the palate was Ned’s aberration with the girl Pansy, and its
questionable consequences. Corn harvest passed, and bracken harvest;
the autumn gales, sweeping in from the Atlantic, spent their rain on
the moor; the birch-trees goldened and the beech-trees grew fox-red;
and, save that Molly Winch was never seen, that Bowden and Steer passed
each other as if they were stocks or stones, and for the interest taken
in the girl Pansy’s appearance by anyone who had a glimpse of her (not
often now, for she was seldom out of the farmyard) the affair might
have been considered at an end.

The breach of promise suit was never mentioned--Steer was too secretive
and too deadly in earnest; the Bowdens too defiant of the law, and too
anxious to forget it; by never mentioning it, even to each other, and
by such occasional remarks as: “Reckon that chap’s bit off more than he
can chu,” they consigned it to a future which to certain temperaments
never exists until it is the present. They had, indeed, one or two
legal reminders, and Ned had twice to see Mr. Applewhite on market
days, but between all this and real apprehension was always the slow
and stolid confidence that the ‘Law’ could be avoided if you ‘sat tight
and did nothin’.’

When, therefore, in late November Ned received a letter from the lawyer
telling him to be at the High Courts of Justice in the Strand, London,
at ten thirty in the morning on a certain day, prepared to give his
evidence, a most peculiar change took place in that bullet-headed
youth. His appetite abandoned him; sweat stood on his brow at moments
unconnected with honest toil. He gave the girl Pansy black looks; and
sat with his prepared evidence before him, wiping the palms of his
hands stealthily on his breeches. That, which he had never really
thought would spring, was upon him after all, and panic, such as
nothing physical could have caused in him, tweaked his nerves and
paralysed his brain. But for his father he would never have come up
to the scratch. Born before the halfpenny Press, and unable to ride a
bicycle, unthreatened moreover by the witness-box, Bowden--after a long
pipe--gave out his opinion that it “widden never du to let that chap
’ave it all his own way. There wasn’t nothin’ to it if Ned kept a stiff
upper lip. ’Twid be an ’oliday-like in London for them both.”

So, dressed in their darkest and most board-like tweeds, with black
bowler hats, they drove in to catch the London train, with a small
boy bobbing on a board behind them to drive the mare back home. Deep
within each was a resentful conviction that this came of women; and
they gave no thought to the feelings of the girl who was plaintiff in
the suit, or of the girl who watched them drive out of the yard. While
the train swiftly bore them, stolid and red-faced, side by side, the
feeling grew within them that to make a holiday of this would spite
that chap Steer. He wanted to make them sweat; if they did not choose
to sweat--it was one in the eye for him.

They put up at an hotel with a Devonshire name in Covent Garden, and in
the evening visited a music-hall where was a show called the ‘Rooshian
ballet.’ They sat a little forward with their hands on their thighs,
their ruddy faces, expressionless as waxworks, directed towards the
stage, whereon ‘Les Sylphides’ were floating white and ethereal. When
the leading danseuse was held upside down, Bowden’s mouth opened
slightly. He was afterwards heard to say that she had ‘got some legs on
her.’ Unable to obtain refreshment after the performance, owing to the
war, they sought the large flasks in their bedroom, and slept, snoring
soundly, as though to express even in their slumbers a contempt for the
machinations of ‘that chap.’


VI

Though sorely tried by the ‘pernicketty’ nature of his niece, Steer
had been borne up by the thought that he had only to hold on a little
longer to obtain justice. How he had got her to the starting-post
he really did not know, so pitiably had she ‘jibbed.’ The conviction
that good solid damages would in the end be better for her than
anything else had salved and soothed a conscience really affected by
her nervous distress. Her pale face and reddened eyes on the way to
the court disturbed him, and yet, he knew they were valuable--she
was looking her best for the occasion! It would be all over--he told
her--in an hour, and then she should go to the seaside--what did she
say to Weston-super-Mare (with one syllable)? She said nothing, and he
had entered the Law Courts with his arm through hers, and his upper
lip very long. The sight of the two Bowdens seated on a bench in the
corridor restored the burning in his heart. He marked his niece’s
eyes slide round as they passed young Bowden. Yes! She would take him
even now! He saw Ned shuffle his feet and Bowden grin, and he hurried
her on--not for anything would he forego the five hundred out of that
fellow’s pocket. At that moment the feud between him and his neighbour
showed naked--those young people were but the catspaw of it. The custom
of the court compelled them all presently to be sitting in a row,
divided faction from faction by not more than the breadth of a pig.
Steer’s thin face, racked by effort to follow the patter of the chap
in a wig, acquired a sort of maniacal fixity; but he kept hold of his
niece’s arm, squeezing it half-consciously now and again, and aware of
her shrinking faint look. As for ‘those two fellers,’ there they sat,
like as at an auction, giving nothing away, as if they thought--darn
them--that the case must fail if they sat tight and did nothing. It
seemed unjust to Steer that they should seem unmoved while his niece
was wilting beside him. When she went up, trembling, into the ‘dock,’
a strong scent of camphor floated from Steer, stirred from his clothes
by the heat within him. He could hardly hear her, and they kept telling
her to speak up. He saw tears roll down her cheeks; and the ginger
in his greying hair and beard brightened while he glared at those
Bowdens, who never moved. They didn’t ask her much--not even Bowden’s
counsel--afraid to, he could see! And, vaguely, through his anger and
discomfort, Steer felt that, with her ‘ladylikeness,’ her tears, her
shrinking, she was making a good impression on judge and jury. It
enraged him to see her made to shrink and weep, but it delighted him
too.

She came back to his side and sat down all shrunk into herself.
Bowden’s counsel began outlining the defence, and Steer listened with
his mouth a little open--an outrageous defence--for what did it amount
to but a confession that the feller had played fast and loose! His
client--said counsel--came into court not to defend this action but to
express his regret as an honourable man for having caused the plaintiff
distress, though not, he would submit, any material damage; for, now
that they had seen her in the box, it would be absurd to suppose that
what was called her ‘value in the marriage market’ had deteriorated.
His client had come there to tell them the simple truth that, finding
his feelings towards the plaintiff changed, he had considered it more
honourable, wise and merciful to renounce his engagement before it
was too late, sooner than enter into a union from the start doomed
to an unhappiness, which, the gentlemen of the jury must remember,
would, in the nature of men and things, fall far more heavily on the
plaintiff than on the defendant himself. Though fully admitting his
responsibility for the mistake he had made and the hastiness of which
he had been guilty, the defendant believed they would give him credit
for his moral courage in stopping before it was too late, and saving
the plaintiff from the fiasco of a miserable marriage....

At the words ‘moral courage’ Steer had righted himself in his seat so
suddenly that the Judge was seen to blink. ‘Moral courage!’ Wasn’t
anybody going to tell those dodos there that the feller had been
playing the rip with that cross-bred slut? Wasn’t anybody going to tell
them that Bowden had put his son up to this to spite him--Steer? A
sense of mystification and falsity muddled and enraged him; it was all
bluff and blarney, like selling a horse....

With the robust common-sense characteristic--counsel went on--of plain
and honest men, the jury would realise that one could not have things
both ways in this world--however it might be in the next. The sad
records of the divorce court showed what was the outcome of hasty and
ill-considered marriages. They gave one to think furiously, indeed,
whether these actions for breach of promise, with their threat of
publicity, were not responsible for much of the work of that dismal
tribunal. He would submit that where you had, as here, a young man,
admitting his error and regretting it, yet manly enough to face this
ordeal in order to save the plaintiff, and in less degree himself, of
course, from a life of misery, that young man was entitled if not to
credit, at least to just and considerate treatment at the hands of his
fellow-citizens, who had themselves all been young and perhaps not
always as wise as Solomon. Let them remember what young blood was--a
sunny lane in that beautiful Western county, the scent of honeysuckle,
a pretty girl--and then let them lay their hands on their hearts and
say that they themselves might not have mistaken the emotions of a
moment for a lifelong feeling.

“Don’t let us be hypocrites, gentlemen, and pretend that we always
carry out that to which in moments of midsummer madness we commit
ourselves. My client will tell you quite simply, for he is a simple
country youth, that he just made a mistake which no one regrets more
than he, and then I shall leave it in your hands--confident that, sorry
as we all are for the disappointment of this charming girl, you will
assess the real values of the case with the instinct of shrewd and
understanding men.”

“Well, I’m darned!”

“H’sh! Silence in the court!”

The mutter which had been riven from Steer by counsel’s closing words,
by no means adequately expressed feelings which grew with every
monosyllable from that ‘young ruffian’ answering the cunning questions
of his advocate.

With his sleek, bullet head he looked sheepish enough, but the thing
was being made so easy for him--that was what seemed villainous to
Steer, that and the sight of Bowden’s face, unmoved, the breadth of
two pigs away. When his own counsel began to cross-examine, Steer
became conscious that he had made a hideous mistake. Why had he not
caused his lawyer to drag in the girl Pansy? What on earth had he been
about to let his natural secretiveness, his pride in his niece, prevent
his using the weapon which would have alienated every sympathy from
that young rascal. He tingled with disappointed anger. So the fellow
was not to be shown up properly! It was outrageous. And then suddenly
his ears pricked. “Now, young man,” counsel was saying, “don’t you
think that in days like these you can serve your country better than by
going about breaking girls’ hearts?... Kindly answer that question!...
Don’t waste his lordship’s time. Yes? Speak up, please!”

“I’m workin’ the land--I’m growin’ food for you to eat!”

“Indeed! The jury will draw their own conclusions as to what sort of
leniency they can extend to a young man in your position.”

And Steer’s lips relaxed. That was a nasty one!

Then came the speeches from counsel on both sides, and everything was
said over again, but Steer had lost interest; disappointment nagged
at him, as at a man who has meant to play a fine innings--and gets
out for seven. Now the Judge was saying everything that everybody
had said and a little more besides. The jury must not let themselves
this, and let themselves that. Defendant’s counsel had alluded to the
divorce court--they must not allow any such consideration to weigh
with them. While the law was what it was breach of promise actions
must be decided on their merits. They would consider this, and they
would consider that, and return a verdict, and give damages according
to their consciences. And out the jury filed. Steer felt lonely while
they were absent. On one side of him were those Bowdens whom he wanted
to make sweat, on the other his niece whom, to judge from her face, he
_had_ made sweat. He was not a lover of animals, but a dog against his
legs would have been a comfort during that long quarter of an hour,
while those two enemies of his so stolidly stared before them. Then the
jury came back, and the sentiment in his heart stuttered into a form he
could have sent through the post: ‘O Lord! make them sweat. Your humble
servant, J. Steer.’

“We find for the plaintiff with damages three hundred pounds.”

Three hundred! And costs--with costs it would come to five! And
Bowden had no capital; he was always on the edge of borrowing to get
through--yes, it would push him hard! And grasping his niece’s arm
Steer rose and led her out by the right-hand door, while the Bowdens
sought the left. In the corridor his lawyer came up. The fellow hadn’t
half done his job! And Steer was about to say so, when those two
fellers passed, walking as though over turnips, and he heard Bowden say:

“Think he’ll get that stickin’ plaster--let ’im wait an’ see!”

He was about to answer, when the lawyer laid hold of his lapel.

“Get your niece away, Mr. Steer; she’s had enough.” And without sense
of conquest, with nothing but a dull irritable aching in his heart,
Steer took her arm and walked her out of the precincts of the law.


VII

The news that New Bowden had ‘joined up’ reached the village
simultaneously with the report that Steer had ‘shot’ him in London for
three hundred pounds and costs for breaking his promise to Molly Winch.
The double sensation was delicious. Honours seemed so easy that no one
could see which had come off best. It was fairly clear, however, that
Molly Winch and the girl Pansy had come off worst. And there was great
curiosity to see them. This was not found possible, for Molly Winch
was at Weston-super-Mare and the girl Pansy invisible, even by those
whose business took them to Bowden’s yard. Bowden himself put in his
customary appearance at ‘The Three Stars,’ where he said quite openly
that Steer would never see a penny of that money; Steer his customary
appearances at church, where he was a warden, and could naturally say
nothing. Christmas passed, and the New Year wore on through colourless
February and March, when every tree was bare, the bracken’s russet had
gone dark-dun, and the hedgerows were songless.

Steer’s victory had lost him his niece; she had displayed invincible
reluctance to return as a conquering heroine, and had gone into an
office. Bowden’s victory had lost him his son, whose training would
soon be over now, and whose battalion was in Flanders. Neither of
the neighbouring enemies showed by word or sign that they saw any
connection between gain and loss; but the schoolmistress met them one
afternoon at the end of March seated in their carts face to face in a
lane so narrow that some compromise was essential to the passage of
either. They had been there without movement long enough for their
mares to have begun grazing in the hedge on either hand. Bowden was
sitting with folded arms and an expression as of his own bull on his
face. Steer’s teeth and eyes were bared very much like a dog’s when it
is going to bite.

The schoolmistress, who had courage, took hold of Bowden’s mare and
backed her.

“Now, Mr. Steer,” she said, “pull in to your left, please. You can’t
stay here all day, blocking the lane for everybody.”

Steer, who after all prized his reputation in the parish, jerked the
reins and pulled in to the hedge. And the schoolmistress, without more
ado, led Bowden’s mare past, foot by foot. The wheels scraped, both
carts jolted slightly; the two farmers’ faces, so close together,
moved no muscle, but when the carts had drawn clear, each, as if by
agreement, expectorated to his right. The schoolmistress loosed the
head of Bowden’s mare and said:

“You ought to be ashamed of yourselves, Mr. Bowden; you and Mr. Steer.”

“How’s that?” said Bowden.

“How’s that indeed? Everybody knows the state of things between you. No
good can come of it. In war-time too, when we ought all to be united.
Why can’t you shake hands and be friends?”

Bowden laughed.

“Shake ’ands with that chap? I’d suner shake ’ands with a dead pig. Let
’im get my son back out o’ the Army.”

The schoolmistress looked up at him.

“And I hope you’re going to look after that poor girl when her time
comes,” she said.

Bowden nodded.

“Never fear! I’d suner the child was hers than that niece of Steer’s.”

The schoolmistress was silent.

“Well,” she said at last, “it’s an unchristian state of mind.”

“Yu go to Steer, ma’am, an’ see whether he’ll be more Christian-like.
He ’olds the plate out Sundays.”

This was precisely what the good lady did, more perhaps from curiosity
than in proselytizing mood.

“What!” said Steer, who was installing a beehive; “when that God-darned
feller put his son up to jilting my niece!”

“And you a Christian, Mr. Steer!”

“There’s a limit to that, ma’am,” said Steer dryly. “In my opinion, not
even our Lord could have put up with that feller. Don’t you waste your
breath trying to persuade me.”

“Dear me!” murmured the schoolmistress. “I don’t know which of you is
worst.”

The only people, in fact, who did know were Steer and Bowden, whose
convictions about each other increased as the spring came in with song
and leaf and sunshine, and there was no son to attend to the sowing and
the calving, and no niece to make the best butter in the parish.

Towards the end of May, on a ‘brave’ day, when the wind was lively in
the ash-trees and the buttercups bright gold, the girl Pansy had her
hour; and on the following morning Bowden received this letter from his
son.


     “DEAR FATHER,

     “They don’t let us tell where we are so all I can say is there’s
     some crumps come over that stop at nothing and you could bury a
     waggon where they hit. The grub is nothing to complain of. Hope
     you have done well with calves. The green within sight of here
     wouldn’t keep a rabbit alive half a day. The thing I wish to say
     is If I have a son by you know who--call it Edward, after you and
     me. It makes you think out here. She would like to hear perhaps
     that I will marry her if I come back so as not to have it on my
     mind. There is some German prisoners in our section--big fellows
     and proper swine with their machine-guns I can tell you. Hope
     you are well as this leaves me. Has that swine Steer given over
     asking for his money? I would like to see the old farm again.
     Tell granma to keep warm. No more now from

     “Your loving son
     “NED.”


After standing for some minutes by the weighing machine trying to
make head or tail of his own sensations, Bowden took the letter up to
the girl Pansy, lying beside her offspring in her narrow cabin of a
room. In countrymen who never observe themselves, a letter or event
which ploughs up fallow land of feeling, or blasts the rock of some
prejudice, causes a prolonged mental stammer or hiatus. So Ned wanted
to marry the girl if he came home! The Bowdens were an old family, the
girl cross-bred. It wasn’t fitting! And the news that Ned had it on his
mind brought home to Bowden as never before the danger his son was in.
With profound instinct he knew that compunction did not seriously visit
those who felt life sure and strong within them; so that there was a
kind of superstition in the way he took the letter up to the girl.
After all, the child was as much bone of Ned’s bone and of his own as
if the girl had been married in church--a boy too. He gave it her with
the words: “Here’s a present for yu and Edward the seventh.”

The village widow, accustomed to attend these simple cases, stepped
outside, and while the girl was reading, Bowden sat down on the low
seat beneath the little window. The ceiling just touched his head if he
remained standing. Her coarse nightgown fell back from her strong arms
and neck, her hair showed black and lustreless on the coarse pillow; he
could not see her face for the letter, but he heard her sigh. Somehow
he felt sorry.

“Shid ought to du yu gude,” he said.

Dropping the letter, so that her eyes met his, the girl spoke.

“Tisn’ nothin’ to me; Ned don’t care for me no more.”

Something inexpressibly cheerless in the tone of her voice, and
uncannily searching in her dark gaze, disturbed Bowden.

“Cheer up!” he murmured; “yu’m got a monstrous baby there, all to
yureself.”

Going up to the bed, he clucked his tongue, and held his finger out to
the baby. He did it softly and with a sort of native aptitude.

“He’m a proper little man.” Then he took up the letter, for there
‘wasn’t,’ he felt, ‘no yuse in leavin’ it there against Ned if an’ in
case he should change his mind when he came safe ’ome.’ But as he went
out he saw the girl Pansy put the baby to her breast, and again he felt
that disturbance, as of pity. With a nod to the village widow, who
was sitting on an empty grocery box reading an old paper by the light
coming through half a skylight, Bowden descended the twisting stairs to
the kitchen. His mother was seated where the sunlight fell, her bright
little dark eyes moving among their mass of wrinkles. Bowden stood a
moment watching her.

“Well, Granny,” he said, “yu’m a great-granny now.”

The old lady nodded, mumbled her lips a little in a smile, and rubbed
one hand on the other. Bowden experienced a shock.

“There ain’t no sense in et all,” he muttered to himself, without
knowing too well what he meant.


VIII

Bowden did not attend when three weeks later the baby was christened
Edward Bowden. He spent the June morning in his cart with a bull-calf,
taking it to market. The cart did not run well, because the weight of
the calf made it jerk and dip. Besides, though used to it all his life,
he had never become quite case-hardened to separating calves from their
mothers. Bowden had a queer feeling for cattle, more feeling indeed
than he had for human beings. He always sat sulky when there was a
little red beast tied up and swaying there behind him. Somehow he felt
for it, as if in some previous existence he might himself have been a
red bull-calf.

Passing through a village someone called:

“’Eard the nus? They beat the Germans up proper yest’day mornin’.”

Bowden nodded. News from the war was now nothing but a reminder of how
that fellow Steer had deprived him of Ned’s help and company. The war
would be over some day, he supposed, but they didn’t seem to get on
with it, gaining ground one day and losing it the next, and all the
time passing this law and that law interfering with the land. Didn’t
they know the land couldn’t be interfered with--the cuckoos? Steer, of
course, was all part of this interference with the land--the fellow
grew wheat where anybody could have told him it couldn’t be grown!

The day was hot, the road dusty, and that chap Steer hanging about the
market like the colley he was--so that Bowden imbibed freely at ‘The
Drake’ before making a start for home.

When he entered his kitchen the newly christened baby was lying in a
grocery box, padded with a pillow and shawl, just out of the sunlight
in which old Mrs. Bowden sat moving her hands as if weaving a spell.
Bowden’s sheepdog had lodged its nose on the edge of the box, and
was sniffing as if to ascertain the difference in the baby. In the
background the girl Pansy moved on her varying business; she looked
strong again, but pale still, and ‘daverdy,’ Bowden thought. He stood
beside the box contemplating the ‘monstrous’ baby. It wasn’t like Ned,
nor anything, so far as he could see. It opened its large grey eyes
while he stood there. That colley Steer would never have a grandchild,
not even one born like this! The thought pleased him. He clucked to the
baby with his tongue, and his sheepdog jealously thrust its head, with
mass of brushed-back snowy hair, under his hand.

“Hullo!” said Bowden, “what’s matter wi’ yu?”

He went out presently, in the slanting sunlight, to look at some beasts
he had on the rough ground below his fields, and the dog followed.
Among the young bracken and the furze not yet in bloom again, he sat
down on a stone. The afternoon was glorious beyond all words, now that
the sun was low, and its glamour had motion, as it were, and flight
across the ash-trees, the hawthorn, and the fern. One may-tree close
beside him was still freakishly in delicate flower, with a sweet
and heavy scent; in the hedge the round cream-coloured heads of the
elder-flower flashed, flat against the glistening air, while the rowans
up the gulley were passing already from blossom towards the brown
unrounded berries.

There was all the magic of transition from season to season, even in
the song of the cuckoo, which flighted arrow-like to a thorn-tree up
the rocky dingle, and started a shrill calling. Bowden counted his
beasts, and marked the fine sheen on their red coats. He was drowsy
from his hot day, from the cider he had drunk, and the hum of the
flies in the fern. Unconsciously he enjoyed a deep and sensuous peace
of warmth and beauty. Ned had said there was no green out there. It
was unimaginable! No green--not the keep of a rabbit; not a curling
young caterpillar-frond of fern; no green tree for a bird to light on!
And Steer had sent him out there! Through his drowsiness that thought
came flapping its black wings. Steer! Who had no son to fight, who was
making money hand over fist. It seemed to Bowden that a malevolent
fortune protected that stingy chap, who couldn’t even take his glass.

There were little blue flowers, speedwell and milkwort, growing
plentifully in the rough grass around; Bowden noted, perhaps for the
first time, those small flower luxuries of which Steer had deprived his
son by sending him to where no grass grew.

He rose at length, retracing his slow-lifted tread up the lane,
deep-soiled with the dried dung of his cows, where innumerable gnats
danced level with the elder-blossom and the ash leaves. The village
postman was leaving the yard when Bowden entered it. The man stopped in
the doorway, and turned his bearded face and dark eyes blinking in the
level sunlight.

“There’s a talegram for yu, Mist Bowden,” he said, and vanished.

“What’s that?” said Bowden dully, and passed in under the porch.

The ‘talegram’ lay unopened on the kitchen table, and Bowden stared at
it. Very few such missives had come his way, perhaps not half a dozen
in his fifty odd years. He took it up, handling it rather as he might
have handled a fowl that would peck, and broke it open with his thumb.


     “Greatly regret inform you your son killed in action on seventh
     instant. War Office.”


He read it through again and again, before he sat down heavily,
dropping it on the table. His round solid face looked still and blind,
its mouth just a little open. The girl Pansy came up and stood beside
him.

“Here!” he said, “read that.”

The girl read it and put her hands up to her ears.

“That idn’ no yuse,” he said, with surprising quickness.

The girl’s pale face crimsoned; she uttered a little wail and ran from
the room.

In the whitewashed kitchen the only moving things were the clock’s
swinging pendulum and old Mrs. Bowden’s restless eyes, close to the
geranium on the window-sill, where the last of the sunlight fell before
passing behind the house. Minute after minute ticked away before Bowden
made a movement--his head bowed, his shoulders rounded, his knees
apart. Then he got up.

“God for ever darn the blasted colley,” he said slowly, gathering up
the telegram. “Where’s my stick?”

Lurching blindly he walked round the room, watched by the old woman’s
little dark bright eyes, and went out. He went at his unvaried gait on
the path towards Steer’s, slowly climbing the two stiles and emerging
from the field into Steer’s farmyard.

“Master in?” he said to the boy who stood by a cow byre.

“No.”

“Where is ’e, then?”

“Not ’ome from Bickton yet.”

“Oh! he idden! Gone in the trap, eh?”

“Ya-a-s.”

And Bowden turned up into the lane. There was a dull buzzing in his
ears, but his nostrils moved, savouring the evening scents of grass,
of cow-dung, dried earth, and hedgerow weeds. His nose was alive, the
rest within him all knotted into a sort of bitter tangle round his
heart. The blood beat in his temples, and he dwelled heavily on foot
and foot. Along this road Steer must come in his cart--God for ever
darn him! Beyond his own top pasture he reached the inn abutting on the
road. From the bench in there under the window he could see anyone who
passed. The innkeeper and two labourers were all the company as yet.
Bowden took his usual mug and sat down on the window-seat. He did not
speak of his loss, and they did not seem to know of it. He just sat
with his eyes on the road. Now and then he responded to some question,
now and then got up and had his mug refilled. Someone came in; he noted
the lowering of voices. They were looking at him. They knew. But
he sat on silent till the inn closed. It was still daylight when he
lurched back up the road toward home, intent on not missing Steer. The
sun had gone down; it was very still. He leaned against the wicket gate
of his top field. Nobody passed. Twilight crept up. The moon rose. An
owl began hooting. Behind him in the field from a group of beech-trees
the shadows stole out ever so faint in the flowery grass, and darkened
slowly as the moonlight brightened.

Bowden leaned his weight against the wood--one knee crooked and then
the other--in dogged stupefaction. He had begun imagining things, but
not very much. No grass, no trees, where his son had been killed,
no birds, no animals; what could it be like--all murky grey in the
moonlight--and Ned’s face all grey! So he would never see Ned’s face
any more! That colley Steer--that colley Steer! His dead son would
never see and hear and smell his home again. Vicarious home-sickness
for this native soil and scent and sound--this nest of his fathers
from time beyond measuring--swept over Bowden. He thought of the old
time when his wife was alive and Ned was born. His wife--why! she had
brought him six, and out of the lot he had only ‘saved’ Ned, and he was
a twin. He remembered how he had told the doctor that he wasn’t to
worry about the ‘maiden’ so long as he saved the boy. He had wanted the
boy to come after him here; and now he was dead and dust! That colley
Steer!

He heard the sound of wheels--a long way off, but coming steadily.
Gripping his stick he stood up straight, staring down the road all
barred with moonlight and the dusk. Closer came the rumble, the
clop-clop of hoofs, till the shape of horse and cart came out of the
darkness into a bright patch. Steer’s right enough! Bowden opened his
wicket gate and waited. The cart came slowly; Bowden saw that the mare
was lame, and Steer was leading her. He lurched a yard out from the
gate.

“’Ere,” he said, “I want to speak to yu. Come in ’ere!”

The moonlight fell on Steer’s thin bearded face.

“What’s that?” he answered.

Bowden turned towards the gate.

“Hitch the mare up; I want to settle my account.”

He saw Steer stand quite still as if debating, then pass the reins over
the gate. His voice came sharp and firm:

“Have you got the money, then?”

“Ah!” said Bowden, and drew back under the trees. He saw Steer coming
cautiously--the colley--with a stick in his hand. He raised his own.

“That’s for Ned,” he said and struck with all his might.

The blow fell short a little; Steer staggered back, raising his stick.

He struck again, but the sticks clashed, and dropping his own, Bowden
lurched at his enemy’s throat. He had twice Steer’s strength and
bulk; half his lean quickness and sobriety. They swayed between the
beech trunks, now in shadow, now in moonlight which made their faces
livid, and showed the expression in their eyes, of men out to kill.
They struggled chest against chest, striving to throw each other;
with short hard gruntings. They reeled against a trunk, staggered and
unclinched, and stood, breathing hard, glaring at each other. All those
months of hatred looked out of their eyes, and their hands twitched
convulsively. Suddenly Steer went on his knees and gripping Bowden’s
legs strained at them, till the heavy unsteady bulk pitched forward
and fell over Steer’s back with stunning weight. They rolled on the
grass then, all mixed up, till they came apart, and sat facing each
other, dazed--Bowden from the drink shaken up within him, Steer from
the weight which had pitched upon his spine. They sat as if each knew
there was no hurry and they were there to finish this; watching each
other, bent a little forward, their legs stuck out in the moonlight,
their mouths open, breathing in hard gasps, ridiculous--to each other!
And suddenly the church bell began to toll. Its measured sound at first
reached only the surface of Bowden’s muddled brain, dully devising the
next attack; then slid into the chambers of his consciousness. Tolling?
Tolling? For whom? His hands fell by his sides. Impulse and inhibition,
action and superstition, revenge and mourning gripped each other
and rolled about within him. A long minute passed. The bell tolled
on. A whinny came from Steer’s lame mare outside the gate. Suddenly
Bowden staggered up, turned his back on his enemy, and, lurching in
the moonlight, walked down the field for home. The clover among the
wild grasses smelled sweet; he heard the sound of wheels--Steer had
started again! Let him go! ’Twasn’t no use--’twouldn’ bring Ned back!
He reached the yard door and stood leaning against it. Cold streaming
moonlight filled the air, covered the fields; the pollarded aspens
shivered above him; on the low rock-wall the striped roses were all
strangely coloured; and a moth went by brushing his cheek.

Bowden lowered his head, as if butting at the beauty of the night. The
bell had ceased to toll--no sound now but the shiver of the aspens,
and the murmur of a stream! ’Twas monstrous peaceful--surely!

And in Bowden something went out. He had not the heart to hate.

1921.




THE MAN WHO KEPT HIS FORM


In these days every landmark is like Alice’s
flamingo-croquet-mallet--when you refer to it, the creature curls
up into an interrogation mark and looks into your face; and every
cornerstone resembles her hedgehog-croquet-ball, which, just before you
can use it, gets up and walks away. The old flavours of life are out
of fashion, the old scents considered stale; ‘gentleman’ is a word to
sneer at, and ‘form’ a sign of idiocy.

And yet there are families in the British Isles in which gentility
has persisted for hundreds of years, and though you may think me
old-fashioned and romantic, I am convinced that such gentlefolk often
have a certain quality, a kind of inner pluck bred into them, which is
not to be despised at all.

This is why I tell you my recollections of Miles Ruding.

My first sight of him--if a new boy may look at a monitor--was on my
rather wretched second day at a Public School. The three other pups who
occupied an attic with me had gone out, and I was ruefully considering
whether I had a right to any wall-space on which to hang two small
oleographs depicting very scarlet horsemen on very bay horses, jumping
very brown hedges, which my mother had bought me, thinking they might
be suitable to the manly taste for which Public Schools are celebrated.
I had taken them out of my playbox, together with the photographs of my
parents and eldest sister, and spread them all on the window-seat. I
was gazing at the little show lugubriously when the door was opened by
a boy in ‘tails.’

“Hallo!” he said. “You new?”

“Yes,” I answered in a mouselike voice.

“I’m Ruding. Head of the House. You get an allowance of two bob weekly
when it’s not stopped. You’ll see the fagging lists on the board. You
don’t get any fagging first fortnight. What’s your name?”

“Bartlet.”

“Oh, ah!” He examined a piece of paper in his hand. “You’re one of
mine. How are you getting on?”

“Pretty well.”

“That’s all right.” He seemed about to withdraw, so I asked him
hastily: “Please, am I allowed to hang these pictures?”

“Rather--any pictures you like. Let’s look at them!” He came forward.
When his eyes fell on the array, he said abruptly, “Oh, sorry!” and,
taking up the oleos, he turned his back on the photographs. A new boy
is something of a psychologist, out of sheer fright, and when he said
“Sorry!” because his eyes had fallen on the effigies of my people, I
felt somehow that he couldn’t be a beast. “You got these at Tomkins’,”
he said. “I had the same my first term. Not bad. I should put ’em up
here.”

While he was holding them to the wall I took a ‘squint’ at him. He
seemed to me of a fabulous height--about five feet ten, I suppose; thin
and bolt upright. He had a stick-up collar--‘barmaids’ had not yet come
in--but not a very high one, and his neck was rather long. His hair was
peculiar, dark and crisp, with a reddish tinge; and his dark-grey eyes
were small and deep in, his cheekbones rather high, his cheeks thin
and touched with freckles. His nose, chin, and cheekbones all seemed a
little large for his face as yet. If I may put it so, there was a sort
of unfinished finish about him. But he looked straight, and had a nice
smile.

“Well, young Bartlet,” he said handing me back the pictures, “buck up,
and you’ll be all right.”

I put away my photographs, and hung the oleos. Ruding! The name was
familiar. Among the marriages in my family pedigree, such as ‘daughter
of Fitzherbert,’ ‘daughter of Tastborough,’ occurred the entry,
‘daughter of Ruding,’ some time before the Civil War. Daughter of
Ruding! This demigod might be a far-off kinsman. But I felt I should
never dare to tell him of the coincidence.

Miles Ruding was not brilliant, but pretty good at everything. He
was not well dressed--you did not think of dress in connection with
him either one way or the other. He was not exactly popular--being
reserved, far from showy, and not rich--but he had no ‘side,’ and
never either patronised or abused his juniors. He was not indulgent to
himself or others, but he was very just; and, unlike many monitors,
seemed to take no pleasure in ‘whopping.’ He never fell off in ‘trials’
at the end of a term, and was always playing as hard at the finish
of a match as at the start. One would have said he had an exacting
conscience, but he was certainly the last person to mention such a
thing. He never showed his feelings, yet he never seemed trying to hide
them, as I used always to be. He was greatly respected without seeming
to care; an independent, self-dependent bird, who would have cut a
greater dash if he hadn’t been so, as it were, uncreative. In all those
two years I only had one at all intimate talk with him, which after all
was perhaps above the average number, considering the difference in
our ages. In my fifth term and Ruding’s last but one, there had been
some disciplinary rumpus in the house, which had hurt the dignity of
the captain of the football ‘torpid’ eleven--a big Irish boy who played
back and was the mainstay of the side. It happened on the eve of our
first house match and the sensation may be imagined when this important
person refused to play; physically and spiritually sore, he declared
for the part of Achilles and withdrew to his tent. The house rocked
with pro and con. My sympathies, in common with nearly all below the
second fifth, lay with Donelly against the sixth form. His defection
had left me captain of the side, so that the question whether we could
play at all depended on me. If I declared a sympathetic strike, the
rest would follow. That evening, after long hours of ‘_fronde_’ with
other rebellious spirits, I was alone and still in two minds, when
Ruding came into my room. He leaned against the door, and said: “Well,
Bartlet, _you’re_ not going to rat?”

“I--I don’t think Donelly ought to have been--been whopped,” I
stammered.

“That as may be,” he said, “but the house comes first. You know that.”

Torn between the loyalties, I was silent.

“Look here, young Bartlet,” he said suddenly, “it’ll be a disgrace to
us all, and it hangs on you.”

“All right,” I said sulkily, “I’ll play.”

“Good chap!”

“But I don’t think Donelly ought to have been whopped,” I repeated
inanely; “he’s--he’s too big.”

Ruding approached till he looked right down on me in my old ‘froust,’
as we called arm-chairs. “One of these days,” he said slowly, “you’ll
be head of the house yourself. You’ll have to keep up the prestige of
the sixth form. If you let great louts like Donelly cheek little weak
six-formers with impunity,” (I remember how impressed I was by the
word) “you’ll let the whole show down. My old governor runs a district
in Bengal, about as big as Wales, entirely on prestige. He’s often
talked to me about it. I hate whopping anybody, but I’d much rather
whop a lout like Donelly than I would a little new chap. He’s a swine
anyway for turning the house down because his back is sore!”

“It isn’t that,” I said, “it--it wasn’t just.”

“If it was unjust,” said Ruding, with what seems to me now
extraordinary patience, “then the whole system’s wrong, and that’s a
pretty big question, young Bartlet. Anyway, it’s not for me to decide.
I’ve got to administer what is. Shake hands, and do your damndest
to-morrow, won’t you?”

I put out my hand with a show of reluctance, though secretly won over.

We got an awful hiding, but I can still hear Ruding’s voice yelling:
“Well played, Bartlet! Well pla-a-ayed!”

I have only one other school recollection of Miles Ruding which lets
any real light in on him. On the day he left for good I happened to
travel up to town in the same carriage. He sat looking through the
window back at the old hill, and I distinctly saw a tear run down his
cheek. He must have been conscious that I had remarked the phenomenon,
for he said suddenly:

“Damn! I’ve got a grit in my eye,” and began to pull the eyelid down in
a manner which did not deceive me in the least.

I then lost sight of him completely for several years. His people were
not well off, and he did not go up to the ’Varsity. He once said to me:
“My family’s beastly old, and beastly poor.”

It was during one of my Odysseys in connection with sport that I saw
him again. He was growing fruit on a ranch in Vancouver Island. Nothing
used to strike a young Englishman travelling in the Colonies more
than the difference between what he saw and what all printed matter
led him to expect. When I ran across Ruding in the club at Victoria
and he invited me to stay with him, I expected rows of fine trees
with large pears and apples hanging on them, a Colonial house with a
broad verandah, and Ruding in ducks, among rifles and fishing rods,
and spirited horses. What I found was a bare new wooden house, not
yet painted, in a clearing of the heavy forest. His fruit trees had
only just been planted, and he would be lucky if he got a crop within
three years. He wore, not white ducks, but blue jeans, and worked
about twelve hours a day, felling timber and clearing fresh ground. He
had one horse to ride and drive, and got off for a day’s shooting or
fishing about once a month. He had three Chinese boys working under
him, and lived nearly as sparingly as they. He had been out of England
eight years, and this was his second venture--the first in Southern
California had failed after three years of drought. He would be all
right for water here, he said; which seemed likely enough in a country
whose rainfall is superior to that of England.

“How the devil do you stand the loneliness?” I said.

“Oh! one gets used to it. Besides, this isn’t lonely. Good Lord, no!
You should see some places!”

Living this sort of life, he yet seemed exactly what he used to be--in
fact, he had kept his form. He didn’t precisely dress for dinner, but
he washed. He had English papers sent out to him, and read Victorian
poetry, and history natural and unnatural, in the evenings over his
pipe. He shaved every day, had his cold tub every morning, and treated
his Chinese boys just as he used to treat us new boys at school; so far
as I could tell, they seemed to have for him much the feelings we used
to have--a respect not amounting to fear, and a liking not quite rising
to affection.

“I couldn’t live here without a woman,” I said one evening.

He sighed. “I don’t want to mess myself up with anything short of a
wife; and I couldn’t ask a girl to marry me till the place is fit for
her. This fruit-growing’s always a gamble at first.”

“You’re an idealist,” I said.

He seemed to shrink, and it occurred to me suddenly that if there were
anything he hated, it would be a generalisation like that. But I was in
a teasing mood.

“You’re keeping up the prestige of the English gentleman.”

His teeth gritted on his pipe-stem. “I’m dashed if I’m keeping up
anything except my end; that’s quite enough.”

“And exactly the same thing,” I murmured.

He turned away. I felt he was much annoyed with me for trying
to introduce him to self-consciousness. And he was right! It’s
destructive; and his life held too many destructive elements--silence,
solitude, distance from home, and this daily mixing with members of an
Eastern race. I used to watch the faces of his Chinese boys--remote as
cats, wonderfully carved, and old, and self-sufficient. I appreciate
now how much of what was carved and old and self-sufficient Ruding
needed in himself to live year in, year out, alone among them, without
losing his form. All that week of my visit I looked with diabolical
curiosity for some sign of deterioration--of the coarsening, or
softening, which one felt ought naturally to come of such a life.
Honestly, I could not find a trace, save that he wouldn’t touch whisky,
as if he were afraid of it, and shied away at any mention of women.

“Aren’t you ever coming home?” I asked when I was taking leave.

“When I’ve made good here,” he said, “I shall come back and marry.”

“And then out again?”

“I expect so. I’ve got no money, you know.”

Four years later I happened to see the following in _The Times_:
“Ruding--Fuljambe.--At St. Thomas’s, Market Harborough, Miles Ruding,
of Bear Ranch, Vancouver Island, to Blanche, daughter of Charles
Fuljambe, J.P., Market Harborough.” So it seemed he _had_ made good!
But I wondered what ‘daughter of Fuljambe’ would make of it out there.
Well, I came across Ruding and his wife that very summer at Eastbourne,
where they were spending the butt end of their long honeymoon. She was
pleasant, pretty, vivacious--too vivacious I felt when I thought of
Bear Ranch; and Ruding himself, under the stimulus of his new venture,
was as nearly creative as I ever saw him. We dined and bathed, played
tennis and went riding on the Downs together. Daughter of Fuljambe was
quite ‘a sport’--though, indeed, in 1899 that word had hardly come into
use. I confess to wondering why, exactly, she had married my friend,
till she gave me the history of it one evening. It seems their families
were old neighbours, and when Ruding came back after having been away
in the New World for twelve years, he was something of a curiosity,
if not of a hero. He had been used to take her out hunting when she
was a small child, so that she had an old-time reverence for him. He
seemed, in his absence of small-talk and ‘side,’ superior to the
rattle-pated young men about her--here daughter of Fuljambe gave me a
sidelong glance--and one day he had done a thing which toppled her into
his arms. She was to go to a fancy dress ball one evening as a Chinese
lady. But in the morning a cat upset a bottle of ink over her dress
and reduced it to ruin. What was to be done? All the elaborate mask of
make-up and head-dressing, which she had rehearsed to such perfection,
sacrificed for want of a dress to wear it with! Ruding left that scene
of desolation possessed by his one great creative impulse. It seemed
that he had in London a Chinese lady’s dress which he had brought
home with him from San Francisco. No trains from Market Harborough
could possibly get him up to town and back in time, so he had promptly
commandeered the only neighbouring motor-car, driven it at a rate which
must have been fabulous in those days to a fast-train junction, got the
dress, sent daughter of Fuljambe a wire, returned at the same furious
pace, and appeared before her door with the dress at eight forty-five.
Daughter of Fuljambe received him in her dressing-gown, with hair
combed up and her face beautifully painted. Ruding said quietly: “Here
you are; it’s the genuine thing,” and disappeared before she had time
to thank him. The dress was superior to the one the cat had spoiled.
That night she accepted him. “Miles didn’t properly propose to me,” she
said; “I saw he couldn’t bear to, because of what he’d done, so I just
had to tell him not to keep his form so awfully. And here we are! He
_is_ a dear, isn’t he?”

In his dealings with her he certainly was, for she was a self-centred
little person.

They went off to Vancouver Island in September. The following January
I heard that he had joined a Yeomanry contingent and gone out to fight
the Boers. He left his wife in England with her people on his way. I
met her once or twice before he was invalided home with enteric. She
told me that she had opposed his going, till she had found out that it
was making him miserable. “And yet, you know,” she said, “he’s really
frightfully devoted to me.”

When he recovered they went back to Vancouver Island, where he found
his ranch so let down that he had to begin nearly all over again. I can
imagine what he went through with his dainty and exacting helpmate. She
came home in 1904 to get over it, and again I met her out hunting.

“Miles is too good for me,” she said the second day as we were jogging
home; “he’s got such fearful pluck. If only he’d kick his conscience
out of the window sometimes. Oh, Mr. Bartlet, I don’t want to go back
there, I really don’t! It’s simply deadly. But he says if he gives this
up he’ll be thirty-eight without a thing to show for it, and just have
to cadge round for a job, and he won’t do that; but I don’t believe I
can stand it much longer.”

I wrote to Ruding. His answer was dry and inexpressive: Heaven forbid
that he should drag his wife out to him again, but he would have to
stick it there for another two years; then, perhaps, he could sell and
buy a farm in England. To clear out now would be ruination. He missed
his wife awfully, but one must hoe one’s row, and he would rather she
stayed with her people than force herself to rough it out there with
him.

Then, of course, came that which a man like Ruding, with his loyalty
and his sense of form, is the last to imagine possible. Daughter of
Fuljambe met a young man in the Buffs or Greens or Blues, and after a
struggle, no doubt--for she was not a bad little sort--went off with
him. That happened early in 1906, just as he was beginning to see the
end of his troubles with Bear Ranch. I felt very sorry for him, yet
inclined to say: “My dear man, where was your imagination; couldn’t you
see this was bound to happen with ‘daughter of Fuljambe’ once she got
away from you?” And yet, poor devil, what could he have done?

He came home six thousand miles to give her a divorce. A ghoulish
curiosity took me into court. I never had more whole-hearted admiration
for Ruding than I had that day, watching him, in that pretentiously
crooked court among us tight-lipped, surly-minded lawyers, giving
his unemotional evidence. Straight, thin, lined and brown, with
grey already in his peculiar-coloured hair, his voice low, his eyes
unwavering, in all his lonely figure a sad, quiet protest--it was not
I only who was moved by the little speech he made to the Judge: “My
Lord, I would like to say that I have no bitter feelings; I think it
was my fault for asking a woman to share a rough, lonely life, so far
away.” It gave me a queer pleasure to see the little bow the Judge made
him, as if saying: ‘Sir, as one gentleman to another.’ I had meant to
get hold of him after the case, but when it came to the point I felt
it was the last thing he would want of anyone. He went straight back
the six thousand miles and sold his ranch. Cunningham, who used to be
in our house, and had a Government post in Esquimault, told me that
Ruding made himself quite unpopular over that sale. Some enterprising
gentleman, interested in real estate, had reported the discovery of
coal seams, which greatly enhanced the value of Bear Ranch and several
neighbouring properties. Ruding was offered a big sum. He took it, and
had already left the neighbourhood when the report about coal was duly
disproved. Ruding at once offered to cancel the price, and take the
agricultural value of the property. His offer was naturally accepted,
and the disgust of other owners who had sold on the original report may
be imagined. More wedded to the rights of property, they upheld the
principle ‘Caveat emptor,’ and justified themselves by calling Ruding
names. With his diminished proceeds he bought another ranch on the
mainland.

How he spent the next eight years I only vaguely know. I don’t think
he came home at all. Cunningham spoke of him as ‘Still the same
steady-going chap, awfully respected; but no one knows him very well.
He looks much as he did, except that he’s gone grey.’

Then, like a bolt from hell, came the Great War. I can imagine Ruding
almost glad. His imagination would not give him the big horror of the
thing; he would see it as the inevitable struggle, the long-expected
chance to show what he and his country were made of. And I must confess
that on the evidence he seems to have been made of even better stuff
than his country. He began by dyeing his hair. By dint of this and by
slurring the eight of his age so that it sounded like forty odd, he was
accepted, and, owing to his Transvaal experience, given a commission in
Kitchener’s Army. But he did not get out to France till early in 1916.
He was considered by his Colonel the best officer in the regiment for
training recruits, and his hair, of course, had soon gone grey again.
They said he chafed terribly at being kept at home. In the spring of
1916 he was mentioned in despatches, and that summer was badly gassed
on the Somme. I went to see him in hospital. He had grown a little grey
moustache, but otherwise seemed quite unchanged. I grasped at once that
he was one of those whose nerve--no matter what happened to him--would
see it through. One had the feeling that this would be so as a matter
of course, that he himself had not envisaged any other possibility.
He was so completely lost in the winning of the war, that his own
sensations seemed to pass him by. He had become as much of a soldier
as the best of those professionally unimaginative stoical creatures,
and, quite naturally, as if it were in his blood. He dwelt quietly,
without visible emotion, in that universal atmosphere of death. All was
in the day’s work, so long as the country emerged victorious; nor did
there seem the least doubt in his mind but that it would so emerge. A
part of me went with him all the way, but a part of me stared at him
in curiosity, surprise, admiration, and a sort of contempt, as at a
creature too single-hearted and uncomplicated.

I saw him several times in that hospital at Teignmouth, where he
recovered slowly.

One day I asked him point-blank whether one’s nerve was not bound to go
in time. He looked a little surprised and said rather coldly: “Not if
your heart’s in the right place.”

That was it to a T. His heart was so deeply rooted in exactly the right
place that nothing external could get at it. Whatever downed Ruding
would have to blow him up bodily--there was no detaching his heart
from the rest of him. And that’s what I mean by an inbred quality, the
inner pluck that you can bet on. I don’t say it’s not to be found in
the proletariat and ‘new’ people, but not in quite the same--shall we
say?--matter of course way. When those others have it, they’re proud of
it or conscious of it, or simply primitively virile and thick-skinned;
they don’t--like such as Ruding--regard not having it as ‘impossible,’
a sort of disgrace. If scientists could examine the nerves of men
like him, would they discern a faint difference in their colour or
texture--the result of generations of nourishment above the average
and of a traditional philosophy which for hundreds of years has held
fear to be _the_ cardinal offence? I wonder.

He went out again in 1917, and was out for the rest of the war.
He did nothing very startling or brilliant; but, as at school, he
was always on the ball, finishing as hard as when he started. At
the Armistice he was a Lieutenant-Colonel, and a Major when he was
gazetted out, at the age of fifty-three, with the various weaknesses
which gas and a prolonged strain leave in a man of that age, but no
pensionable disability. He went back to Vancouver. Anyone at all
familiar with fruit-growing knows it for a pursuit demanding the most
even and constant attention. When Ruding joined up he had perforce
left his ranch in the first hands which came along; and at that time,
with almost every rancher in like case, those hands were very poor
substitutes for the hands of an owner. He went back to a property
practically valueless. He was not in sufficient health to sit down
for another long struggle to pull it round, as after the Boer War,
so he sold it for a song and came home again, full of confidence
that, with his record, he would get a job. He found that his case was
that of thousands. They didn’t want him back in the Army. They were
awfully sorry, but they didn’t know what they could do for him. The
Governmental education and employment schemes, too, seemed all for
younger men. He sat down on the ‘song’ and the savings from his pay to
wait for some ship or other out of his fleet of applications to come
home. It did not come; his savings went. How did I know all this? I
will tell you.

One night last January I had occasion to take a cab from a restaurant
in Soho to my club in Pall Mall. It was wet, and I got in hastily.
I was sitting there comatose from my good dinner when I had a queer
feeling that I knew the back of the driver. It had--what shall I call
it?--a refined look. The man’s hair was grey; and I began trying to
recollect the profile I had glimpsed when bolting in. Suddenly with a
sort of horror the thought flashed through me: Miles Ruding!

It was!

When I got out and we looked each other in the face he smiled and my
lips quivered. “Old chap,” I said, “draw your cab up on that stand and
get in with me.”

When we were sitting together in his cab we lighted cigarettes and
didn’t speak for quite a minute, till I burst out:

“Look here! What does this mean?”

“Bread and butter.”

“Good God! And this is what the country----”

“Bartlet,” he said, through curiously set lips with a little fixed
smile about the corners, “cut out all that about the country. I prefer
this to any more cadging for a job; that’s all.”

Silent from shame, I broke out at last: “It’s the limit! What about the
Government schemes?”

“No go! All for younger men.”

“My dear chap!” was the only thing I could find to say.

“This isn’t a bad life in good weather,” he went on with that queer
smile; “I’ve still got gassy lungs.”

“Do you mean to say you contemplate going on with this?”

“Till something turns up; but I’m no good at asking for things,
Bartlet; I simply can’t do it.”

“What about your people?”

“Dead or broke.”

“Come and stay with me till your ship comes home.”

He squeezed my arm and shook his head. That’s what’s so queer about
gentility! If only I could have established a blood tie! Ruding would
have taken help or support from his kinsfolk--would have inherited
without a qualm from a second cousin that he’d never seen; but from
the rest of the world it would be charity. Sitting in that cab of his,
he told me, without bitterness, the tale which is that of hundreds
since the war. Ruding could not be pitied to his face, it would have
been impossible. And when he had finished I could only mutter:

“Well, I think it’s damnable, considering what the country owes you.”

He did not answer. Whatever his limitations Miles Ruding was bred to
keep his form.

I nearly shook his hand off when I left him, and I could see that he
disliked that excessive display of feeling. From my club doorway I saw
him resume his driver’s seat, the cigarette still between his lips, and
the lamplight shining on his lean profile. Very still he sat--symbol of
that lost cause, gentility.

1920.




A HEDONIST


Rupert K. Vaness remains freshly in my mind because he was so fine
and large, and because he summed up in his person and behaviour a
philosophy which, budding before the war, hibernated during that
distressing epoch, and is now again in bloom.

He was a New Yorker addicted to Italy. One often puzzled over the
composition of his blood. From his appearance it was rich; and his
name fortified the conclusion. What the K. stood for, however, I
never learned; the three possibilities were equally intriguing. Had
he a strain of Highlander with Kenneth or Keith; a drop of German or
Scandinavian with Kurt or Knut; a blend of Syrian or Armenian with
Khalil or Kassim? The blue in his fine eyes seemed to preclude the
last, but there was an encouraging curve in his nostrils and a raven
gleam in his auburn hair, which, by the way, was beginning to grizzle
and recede when I knew him. The flesh of his face, too, had sometimes
a tired and pouchy appearance, and his tall body looked a trifle
rebellious within his extremely well-cut clothes--but, after all, he
was fifty-five. You felt that Vaness was a philosopher, yet he never
bored you with his views, and was content to let you grasp his moving
principle gradually through watching what he ate, drank, smoked, wore,
and how he encircled himself with the beautiful things and people of
this life. Presumably he was rich, for one was never conscious of money
in his presence. Life moved round him with a certain noiseless ease or
stood still at a perfect temperature like the air in a conservatory
round a choice blossom which a draught might shrivel.

This image of a flower in relation to Rupert K. Vaness pleases me
because of that little incident in Magnolia Gardens, near Charleston,
South Carolina.

Vaness was the sort of man of whom one could never say with safety
whether he was revolving round a beautiful young woman or whether the
beautiful young woman was revolving round him. His looks, his wealth,
his taste, his reputation, invested him with a certain sun-like
quality; but his age, the recession of his locks, and the advancement
of his waist were beginning to dim his lustre; so that whether he was
moth or candle was becoming a moot point. It was moot to me watching
him and Miss Sabine Monroy at Charleston throughout the month of
March. The casual observer would have said that she was ‘playing him
up’ as a young poet of my acquaintance puts it; but I was not casual.
For me Vaness had the attraction of a theorem, and I was looking rather
deeply into him and Miss Monroy. That girl had charm. She came, I
think, from Baltimore, with a strain in her, they said, of old Southern
Creole blood. Tall and what is known as willowy, with dark chestnut
hair, very broad dark eyebrows, very soft quick eyes, and a pretty
mouth--when she did not accentuate it too much with lip-salve--she had
more sheer quiet vitality than any girl I ever saw. It was delightful
to watch her dance, ride, play tennis. She laughed with her eyes; she
talked with a savouring vivacity. She never seemed tired or bored. She
was--in one hackneyed word--‘attractive.’ And Vaness, the connoisseur,
was quite obviously attracted. With professional admirers of beauty who
can tell whether they definitely design to add a pretty woman to their
collection, or whether their dalliance is just matter of habit? But
he stood and sat about her, he drove and rode, listened to music, and
played cards with her; he did all but dance with her, and even at times
trembled on the brink of that. And his eyes--those fine lustrous eyes
of his--followed her about.

How she had remained unmarried at the age of twenty-six was a mystery
till one reflected that with her power of enjoying life she could not
yet have had the time. Her perfect physique was at full stretch for
eighteen hours out of the twenty-four each day. Her sleep must have
been like that of a baby. One figured her sinking into dreamless rest
the moment her head touched pillow, and never stirring till she sprang
up into her bath.

As I say, for me, Vaness, or rather his philosophy, _erat
demonstrandum_. I was myself in some philosophic distress just then.
The microbe of fatalism, already present in the brains of artists
before the war, had been considerably enlarged by that depressing
occurrence. Could a civilisation basing itself on the production of
material advantages do anything but ensure the desire for more and
more material advantages. Could it promote progress even of a material
character except in countries whose resources were still much in excess
of their populations? The war had seemed to me to show that mankind was
too combative an animal ever to recognise that the good of all was the
good of one. The coarse-fibred, pugnacious, and self-seeking would, I
had become sure, always carry too many guns for the refined and kindly.
In short, there was not enough altruism to go round--not half, not
a hundredth part enough. The simple heroism of mankind, disclosed or
rather accentuated by the war, seemed to afford no hope--it was so
exploitable by the rhinoceri and tigers of high life. The march of
science appeared on the whole to be carrying us backward, and I deeply
suspected that there had been ages when the populations of this earth,
though less numerous and comfortable, had been proportionately more
healthy than they were at present. As for religion, I had never had
the least faith in Providence rewarding the pitiable by giving them a
future life of bliss; the theory seemed to me illogical, for even more
pitiable in this life appeared to me the thick-skinned and successful,
and these, as we know in the saying about the camel and the needle’s
eye, are consigned wholesale to hell. Success, power, wealth--those
aims of profiteers and premiers, pedagogues and pandemoniacs, of all,
in fact, who could not see God in a dewdrop, hear Him in distant
goat-bells, and scent Him in a pepper-tree--had always appeared to me
akin to dry-rot. And yet every day one saw more distinctly that the
holders of the ‘power’ philosophy were the hub of a universe which,
with the approbation of the majority they represented, they were fast
making uninhabitable. It did not even seem of any use to help one’s
neighbours; all efforts at relief just gilded the pill and encouraged
our stubbornly contentious leaders to plunge us all into fresh
miseries. So I was searching right and left for something to believe
in, willing to accept even Rupert K. Vaness and his basking philosophy.
But, then, could a man bask his life right out? Could just looking at
fine pictures, tasting rare fruits and wines, the mere listening to
good music, the scent of azaleas and the best tobacco, above all the
society of pretty women, keep salt in my bread, an ideal in my brain?
Could they? That’s what I wanted to know.

Everyone who goes to Charleston in the spring, soon or late, visits
Magnolia Gardens. A painter of flowers and trees myself, I specialise
in gardens, and freely assert that none in the world is so beautiful
as this. Even before the magnolias come out it consigns the Boboli
at Florence, the Cinnamon Gardens of Colombo, Concepcion at Malaga,
Versailles, Hampton Court, the Generaliffe at Granada, and La Mortola
to the category of ‘also ran.’ Nothing so free, gracious, so lovely
and wistful, nothing so richly coloured, yet so ghostlike, exists
planted by the sons of men. It is a kind of paradise which has wandered
down, a miraculously enchanted wilderness. Brilliant with azaleas,
or magnolia-pale, it centres round a pool of water overhung by tall
trunks festooned with the grey Florida moss. Beyond anything I have
ever seen it is other-worldly. And I went there day after day, drawn
as one is drawn in youth by visions of the Ionian Sea, of the East, or
the Pacific Isles. I used to sit paralysed by the absurdity of putting
brush to canvas in front of that dream-pool. I wanted to paint of it
a picture like that of the fountain, by Helleu, which hangs in the
Luxembourg. But I knew I never should.

I was sitting there one sunny afternoon with my back to a clump of
azaleas watching an old coloured gardener--so old that he had started
life as an ‘owned’ negro they said, and certainly still retained the
familiar suavity of the oldtime darkie--I was watching him prune the
shrubs when I heard the voice of Rupert K. Vaness say, quite close:
“There’s nothing for me but beauty, Miss Monroy.”

The two were evidently just behind my azalea clump, perhaps four yards
away, yet as invisible as if in China.

“Beauty is a wide, wide word. Define it, Mr. Vaness.”

“An ounce of fact is worth a ton of theory--it stands before me.”

“Come now, that’s just a get-out. Is beauty of the flesh or of the
spirit?”

“What is the spirit as you call it? I’m a Pagan.”

“Oh! So am I. But the Greeks were Pagans.”

“Well, spirit is only the refined side of sensual appreciations.”

“I wonder!”

“I have spent my life in finding that out.”

“Then, the feeling this garden rouses in me is purely sensuous?”

“Of course. If you were standing there blind and deaf, without the
powers of scent and touch, where would your feeling be?”

“You are very discouraging, Mr. Vaness.”

“No, madam--I face facts. When I was a youngster I had plenty of fluffy
aspiration towards I didn’t know what--I even used to write poetry.”

“Oh! Mr. Vaness, was it good?”

“It was not, and I very soon learned that a genuine sensation was worth
all the uplift in the world.”

“What is going to happen when your senses strike work?”

“I shall sit in the sun and fade out.”

“I certainly do like your frankness.”

“You think me a cynic, of course; I am nothing so futile, Miss Sabine.
A cynic is just a posing ass proud of his attitude. I see nothing to be
proud of in my attitude, just as I see nothing to be proud of in the
truths of existence.”

“Suppose you had been poor?”

“My senses would be lasting better than they are; and when they at last
failed I should die quicker from want of food and warmth--that’s all.”

“Have you ever been in love, Mr. Vaness?”

“I am in love now.”

“And your love has no element of devotion, no finer side?”

“None. It wants.”

“I have never been in love. But, if I were, I think I should want to
lose myself rather than to gain the other.”

“Would you? Sabine, _I am in love with you_.”

“Oh! Shall we walk on?”

I heard their footsteps and was alone again, with the old gardener
lopping at his shrubs.

But what a perfect declaration of hedonism; how simple and how solid
was this Vaness theory of existence! Almost Assyrian--worthy of Louis
Quinze!

And just then the old negro came up.

“It’s pleasant settin’,” he said in his polite and hoarse half whisper;
“dar ain’t no flies yet.”

“It’s perfect, Richard. This is the most beautiful spot in the world.”

“Sure,” he answered, softly drawling. “In de war time de Yanks nearly
burn d’house heah. Sherman’s Yanks. Sure dey did, po’ful angry wi’ ole
Massa dey was, ’cos he hid up d’ silver plate afore he went away. My
ole father was de factotalum den. De Yanks took’m, suh; dey took’m; and
de major he tell my fader to show’m whar de plate was. My ole fader he
look at’m an’ say: ‘Wot yuh take me foh? Yuh take me for a sneakin’
nigger? No, suh, yuh do wot yuh like wid dis chile he ain’t goin’ to
act no Judas. No, suh!’ And de Yankee major he put’m up against dat
tall live-oak dar, an’ he say: ‘Yu darn ungrateful nigger. I’se come
all dis way to set yuh free. Now, whar’s dat silver plate or I shoot
yuh up, sure!’ ‘No, suh,’ says my fader, ‘shoot away. I’se never goin’
t’tell.’ So dey begin to shoot, and shot all roun’m to skeer’m up.
I was a lil’ boy den, an’ I see my ole fader wid my own eyes, suh,
standin’ thar’s bold’s Peter. No, suh, dey didn’t never get no word
from him; he loved de folk heah; sure he did.”

The old man smiled; and in that beatific smile I saw not only his
perennial pleasure in the well-known story, but the fact that he too
would have stood there with the bullets raining round him sooner than
betray the folk he loved.

“Fine story, Richard. But--very silly obstinate old man, your father,
wasn’t he?”

He looked at me with a sort of startled anger, which slowly broadened
into a grin; then broke into soft hoarse laughter.

“Oh! yes, suh, sure! Berry silly obstinacious ole man. Yes, suh,
indeed!” And he went off cackling to himself.

He had only just gone when I heard footsteps again behind my azalea
clump and Miss Monroy’s voice:

“Your philosophy is that of faun and nymph. But can you play the part?”

“Only let me try.” Those words had such a fevered ring that in
imagination I could see Vaness all flushed, his fine eyes shining, his
well-kept hands trembling, his lips a little protruded.

There came a laugh, high, gay, sweet.

“Very well then; catch me!” I heard a swish of skirt against the
shrubs, the sounds of flight; an astonished gasp from Vaness, and the
heavy thud thud of his feet following on the path through the azalea
maze. I hoped fervently that they would not suddenly come running past
and see me sitting there. My straining ears caught another laugh far
off, a panting sound, a muttered oath, a far-away coo-ee! And then,
staggering, winded, pale with heat and with vexation, Vaness appeared,
caught sight of me and stood a moment--baff! Sweat was running down his
face, his hand was clutching at his side, his stomach heaved--a hunter
beaten and undignified. He muttered, turned abruptly on his heel, and
left me staring at where his fastidious dandyism and all that it stood
for had so abruptly come undone.

I know not how he and Miss Monroy got home to Charleston; not in the
same car, I guess. As for me, I travelled deep in thought, conscious
of having witnessed something rather tragic, not looking forward to my
next encounter with Vaness.

He was not at dinner, but the girl was--radiant as ever; and though
I was glad she had not been caught I was almost angry at the signal
triumph of her youth. She wore a black dress with a red flower in her
hair and another at her breast, and had never looked so vital and so
pretty. Instead of dallying with my cigar beside cool waters in the
lounge of the hotel I strolled out afterwards on the Battery and sat
down beside the statue of a tutelary personage. A lovely evening: from
some tree or shrub close by emerged an adorable faint fragrance, and in
the white electric light the acacia foliage was patterned out against
a thrilling blue sky. If there were no fireflies abroad there should
have been. A night for hedonists, indeed!

And suddenly there came before me two freaks of vision--Vaness’s
well-dressed person, panting, pale, perplexed; and beside him the old
darkie’s father, bound to the live-oak, with the bullets whistling past
and his face transfigured. There they stood alongside--the creed of
pleasure, which depended for fulfilment on its waist measurement; and
the creed of love devoted unto death!

‘Aha!’ I thought, ‘which of the two laughs _last_?’

And just then I saw Vaness himself beneath a lamp; cigar in mouth and
cape flung back so that its silk lining shone. Pale and heavy, in the
cruel white light, his face had a bitter look. And I was sorry--very
sorry, at that moment, for Rupert K. Vaness.

1920.




TIMBER


Sir Arthur Hirries, Baronet, of Hirriehugh, in a northern county, came
to the decision to sell his timber, in that state of mind--common
during the war--which may be called patrio-profiteering. Like newspaper
proprietors, writers on strategy, shipbuilders, owners of factories,
makers of arms and the rest of the working classes at large, his mood
was: ‘Let me serve my country, and if thereby my profits are increased,
let me put up with it, and invest in National Bonds.’

With an encumbered estate and some of the best coverts in that northern
county, it had not become practical politics to sell his timber till
the Government wanted it at all costs. To let his shooting had been
more profitable, until now, when a patriotic action and a stroke of
business had become synonymous. A man of sixty-five, but not yet grey,
with a reddish tinge in his moustache, cheeks, lips and eyelids,
slightly knock-kneed, and with large, rather spreading feet, he moved
in the best circles in a somewhat embarrassed manner. At the enhanced
price, the timber at Hirriehugh would enfranchise him for the
remainder of his days. He sold it therefore one day of April when the
war news was bad, to a Government official on the spot. He sold it at
half-past five in the afternoon, practically for cash down, and drank a
stiff whisky and soda to wash away the taste of the transaction; for,
though no sentimentalist, his great-great-grandfather had planted most
of it, and his grandfather the rest. Royalty, too, had shot there in
its time and he himself (never much of a sportsman) had missed more
birds in the rides and hollows of his fine coverts than he cared to
remember. But the country was in need, and the price considerable.
Bidding the Government official good-bye, he lighted a cigar, and went
across the park to take a farewell stroll among his timber.

He entered the home covert by a path leading through a group of
pear-trees just coming into bloom. Smoking cigars and drinking whisky
in the afternoon in preference to tea, Sir Arthur Hirries had not much
sense of natural beauty. But those pear-trees impressed him, greenish
white against blue sky and fleecy thick clouds which looked as if they
had snow in them. They were deuced pretty, and promised a good year for
fruit, if they escaped the late frosts, though it certainly looked like
freezing to-night! He paused a moment at the wicket gate to glance
back at those scantily clothed white maidens posing on the outskirts
of his timber. Such was not the vision of Sir Arthur Hirries, who was
considering how he should invest the balance of the cash down after
paying off his mortgages. National Bonds--the country was in need!

Passing through the gate he entered the ride of the home covert.
Variety lay like colour on his woods. They stretched for miles, and his
ancestors had planted almost every kind of tree--beech, oak, birch,
sycamore, ash, elm, hazel, holly, pine; a lime-tree and a hornbeam
here and there, and further in among the winding coverts, spinneys
and belts of larch. The evening air was sharp, and sleet showers came
whirling from those bright clouds; he walked briskly, drawing at his
richly fragrant cigar, the whisky still warm within him. He walked
thinking, with a gentle melancholy slowly turning a little sulky, that
he would never again be pointing out with his shooting stick to such or
such a guest where he was to stand to get the best birds over him. The
pheasants had been let down during the war, but he put up two or three
old cocks, who went clattering and whirring out to left and right; and
rabbits crossed the rides quietly to and fro, within easy shot. He came
to where Royalty had stood fifteen years ago during the last drive. He
remembered Royalty saying: “Very pretty shooting at that last stand,
Hirries; birds just about as high as I like them.” The ground indeed
rose rather steeply there, and the timber was oak and ash, with a few
dark pines sprinkled into the bare greyish twiggery of the oaks, always
costive in spring, and the just greening feather of the ashes.

“They’ll be cutting those pines first,” he thought--strapping trees,
straight as the lines of Euclid, and free of branches, save at their
tops. In the brisk wind those tops swayed a little and gave forth
soft complaint. ‘Three times my age,’ he thought; ‘prime timber.’
The ride wound sharply and entered a belt of larch, whose steep rise
entirely barred off the rather sinister sunset--a dark and wistful
wood, delicate dun and grey, whose green shoots and crimson tips
would have perfumed the evening coolness, but for the cigar smoke in
his nostrils. ‘They’ll have this spinney for pit props,’ he thought;
and, taking a cross ride through it, he emerged in a heathery glen of
birch-trees. No forester, he wondered if they would make anything of
those whitened, glistening shapes. His cigar had gone out now, and he
leaned against one of the satin-smooth stems, under the lacery of twig
and bud, sheltering the flame of a relighting match. A hare lopped
away among the bilberry shoots; a jay, painted like a fan, squawked
and flustered past him up the glen. Interested in birds, and wanting
just one more jay to complete a fine stuffed group of them, Sir Arthur,
though devoid of a gun, followed, to see where ‘the beggar’s’ nest
was. The glen dipped rapidly, and the character of the timber changed,
assuming greater girth and solidity. There was a lot of beech here--a
bit he did not know, for though taken-in by the beaters, no guns could
be stationed there because of the lack of undergrowth. The jay had
vanished, and light had begun to fail. ‘Must get back,’ he thought, ‘or
I shall be late for dinner.’ For a moment he debated whether to retrace
his steps, or cut across the beeches and regain the home covert by a
loop. The jay, reappearing to the left, decided him to cross the beech
grove. He did so, and took a narrow ride up through a dark bit of mixed
timber with heavy undergrowth. The ride, after favouring the left for
a little, bent away to the right; Sir Arthur followed it hurriedly,
conscious that twilight was gathering fast. It must bend again to the
left in a minute! It did, and then to the right, and, the undergrowth
remaining thick, he could only follow on, or else retrace his steps.
He followed on, beginning to get hot in spite of a sleet shower falling
through the dusk. He was not framed by Nature for swift travelling--his
knees turning in and his toes turning out--but he went at a good bat,
uncomfortably aware that the ride was still taking him away from home,
and expecting it at any minute to turn left again. It did not, and hot,
out of breath, a little bewildered, he stood still in three-quarter
darkness, to listen. Not a sound, save that of wind in the tops of
the trees, and a faint creaking of timber, where two stems had grown
athwart and were touching.

The path was a regular will o’ the wisp. He must make a bee line of
it through the undergrowth into another ride! He had never before
been amongst his timber in the dusk, and he found the shapes of the
confounded trees more weird, and as if menacing, that he had ever
dreamed of. He stumbled quickly on in and out of them among the
undergrowth, without coming to a ride.

‘Here I am stuck in this damned wood!’ he thought. To call these
formidably encircling shapes ‘a wood’ gave him relief. After all, it
was _his_ wood, and nothing very untoward could happen to a man in
his own wood, however dark it might get; he could not be more than a
mile and a half at the outside from his dining-room! He looked at
his watch, whose hands he could just see--nearly half-past seven! The
sleet had become snow, but it hardly fell on him, so thick was the
timber just here. But he had no overcoat, and suddenly he felt that
first sickening little drop in his chest which presages alarm. Nobody
knew he was in this damned wood! And in a quarter of an hour it would
be black as your hat! He _must_ get on and out! The trees amongst
which he was stumbling produced quite a sick feeling now in one who
hitherto had never taken trees seriously. What monstrous growths they
were! The thought that seeds, tiny seeds or saplings, planted by his
ancestors, could attain such huge impending and imprisoning bulk--the
ghostly great growths, mounting up to heaven and shutting off this
world, exasperated and unnerved him. He began to run, caught his foot
in a root, and fell flat on his face. The cursed trees seemed to have
a down on him! Rubbing elbows and forehead with his snow-wetted hands,
he leaned against a trunk to get his breath, and summon the sense of
direction to his brain. Once as a young man he had been ‘bushed’ at
night in Vancouver Island; quite a scary business! But he had come out
all right, though his camp had been the only civilised spot within a
radius of twenty miles. And here he was, on his own estate, within
a mile or two of home, getting into a funk. It was childish! And he
laughed. The wind answered, sighing and threshing in the tree tops.
There must be a regular blizzard blowing now, and, to judge by the
cold, from the north--but whether north-east or north-west was the
question. Besides, how keep definite direction without a compass in the
dark? The timber, too, with its thick trunks, diverted the wind into
keen, directionless draughts. He looked up, but could make nothing of
the two or three stars that he could see. It was a mess! And he lighted
a second cigar with some difficulty, for he had begun to shiver. The
wind in this blasted wood cut through his Norfolk jacket and crawled
about his body, which had become hot from his exertions, and now
felt clammy and half-frozen. This would mean pneumonia, if he didn’t
look out! And, half feeling his way from trunk to trunk, he started
on again, but for all he could tell he might be going round in a
circle, might even be crossing rides without realising, and again that
sickening drop occurred in his chest. He stood still and shouted. He
had the feeling of shouting into walls of timber, dark and heavy, which
threw the sound back at him.

‘Curse you!’ he thought. ‘Wish I’d sold you six months ago!’ The wind
fleered and mowed in the tree tops; and he started off again at a run
in that dark wilderness; till, hitting his head against a low branch,
he fell, stunned. He lay several minutes unconscious, came to himself
deadly cold, and struggled up on to his feet.

‘By Jove!’ he thought, with a sort of stammer in his brain; ‘this is
a bad business! I may be out here all night!’ For an unimaginative
man, it was extraordinary what vivid images he had just then. He saw
the face of the Government official who had bought his timber, and
the slight grimace with which he had agreed to the price. He saw his
butler, after the gong had gone, standing like a stuck pig by the
sideboard, waiting for him to come down. What would they do when he
didn’t come? Would they have the _nous_ to imagine that he might have
lost his way in the coverts, and take lanterns and search for him?
Far more likely they would think he had walked over to Greenlands or
Berrymoor, and stayed there to dinner. And, suddenly, he saw himself
slowly freezing out here, in the snowy night, among this cursed timber.
With a vigorous shake, he butted again into the darkness among the tree
trunks. He was angry now--with himself, with the night, with the trees;
so angry that he actually let out with his fist at a trunk against
which he had stumbled, and scored his knuckles. It was humiliating;
and Sir Arthur Hirries was not accustomed to humiliation. In anybody
else’s wood--yes; but to be lost like this in one’s own coverts! Well,
if he had to walk all night, he would get out! And he plunged on
doggedly in the darkness.

He was fighting with his timber now, as if the thing were alive and
each tree an enemy. In the interminable stumbling exertion of that
groping progress his angry mood gave place to half-comatose philosophy.
Trees! His great-great-grandfather had planted them! His own was the
fifth man’s life, but the trees were almost as young as ever; they
made nothing of a man’s life! He sniggered: and a man made nothing of
theirs! Did they know they were going to be cut down? All the better
if they did, and were sweating in their shoes. He pinched himself--his
thoughts were becoming so queer! He remembered that once, when his
liver was out of order, trees had seemed to him like solid, tall
diseases--bulbous, scarred, cavernous, witch-armed, fungoid emanations
of the earth. Well, so they were! And he was among them, on a snowy
pitch-black night, engaged in this death-struggle! The occurrence
of the word death in his thoughts brought him up all standing. Why
couldn’t he concentrate his mind on getting out; why was he mooning
about the life and nature of trees instead of trying to remember the
conformation of his coverts, so as to rekindle in himself some sense
of general direction? He struck a number of matches, to get a sight of
his watch again. Great heaven! He had been walking nearly two hours
since he last looked at it; and in what direction? They said a man in
a fog went round and round because of some kink in his brain! He began
now to feel the trees, searching for a hollow trunk. A hollow would
be some protection from the cold--his first conscious confession of
exhaustion. He was not in training, and he was sixty-five. The thought:
‘Can’t keep this up much longer,’ caused a second explosion of sullen
anger. Damnation! Here he was--for all he could tell--standing where he
had sat perhaps a dozen times on his spread shooting stick; watching
sunlight on bare twigs, or the nose of his spaniel twitching beside
him, listening to the tap of the beaters’ sticks, and the shrill,
drawn-out: “Marrk! Cock over!” Would they let the dogs out, to pick up
his tracks? No! ten to one they would assume he was staying the night
at the Summertons, or at Lady Mary’s, as he had done before now, after
dining there. And suddenly his strained heart leaped. He had struck a
ride again! His mind slipped back into place like an elastic let-go,
relaxed, quivering gratefully. He had only to follow this ride, and
somewhere, somehow, he would come out. And be hanged if he would let
them know what a fool he had made of himself! Right or left--which way?
He turned so that the flying snow came on his back, hurrying forward
between the denser darkness on either hand, where the timber stood
in walls, moving his arms across and across his body, as if dragging
a concertina to full stretch, to make sure that he was keeping in
the path. He went what seemed an interminable way like this, till he
was brought up all standing by trees, and could find no outlet, no
continuation. Turning in his tracks, with the snow in his face now, he
retraced his steps till once more he was brought-up short by trees.
He stood panting. It was ghastly--ghastly! And in a panic he dived
this way and that to find the bend, the turning, the way on. The sleet
stung his eyes, the wind fleered and whistled, the boughs sloughed and
moaned. He struck matches, trying to shade them with his cold, wet
hands, but one by one they went out, and still he found no turning.
The ride must be blind-alley at either end, the turning be down the
side somewhere! Hope revived in him. Never say die! He began a second
retracing of his steps, feeling the trunks along one side, to find a
gap. His breath came with difficulty. What would old Brodley say if
he could see him, soaked, sweating, frozen, tired to death, stumbling
along in the darkness among this cursed timber--old Brodley who had
told him his heart was in poor case!... A gap? Ah! No trunks--a ride at
last! He turned, felt a sharp pain in his knee and pitched forward. He
could not rise--the knee dislocated six years ago was out again. Sir
Arthur Hirries clenched his teeth. Nothing more could happen to him!
But after a minute--blank and bitter--he began to crawl along the new
ride. Oddly he felt less discouraged and alarmed on hands and knee--for
he could use but one. It was a relief to have his eyes fixed on the
ground, not peering at the tree trunks; or perhaps there was less
strain for the moment on his heart. He crawled, stopping every minute
or so, to renew his strength. He crawled mechanically, waiting for his
heart, his knee, his lungs to stop him. The earth was snowed over, and
he could feel its cold wetness as he scraped along. Good tracks to
follow, if anybody struck them! But in this dark forest----! In one of
his halts, drying his hands as best he could, he struck a match, and
sheltering it desperately, fumbled out his watch. Past ten o’clock. He
wound the watch, and put it back against his heart. If only he could
wind his heart! And squatting there he counted his matches--four! He
thought grimly: ‘I won’t light them to show me my blasted trees. I’ve
got a cigar left; I’ll keep them for that!’ And he crawled on again. He
must keep going while he could!

He crawled till his heart and lungs and knee struck work; and, leaning
his back against a tree, sat huddled together, so exhausted that he
felt nothing save a sort of bitter heartache. He even dropped asleep,
waking with a shudder, dragged from a dream arm-chair at the Club into
this cold, wet darkness and the blizzard moaning in the trees. He tried
to crawl again, but could not, and for some minutes stayed motionless,
hugging his body with his arms. ‘Well,’ he thought vaguely, ‘I _have_
done it!’ His mind was in such lethargy that he could not even pity
himself. His matches: could he make a fire? But he was no woodsman,
and, though he groped around, could find no fuel that was not soaking
wet. He scraped a hole and with what papers he had in his pockets
tried to kindle the wet wood. No good! He had only two matches left
now, and he remembered his cigar. He took it out, bit the end off, and
began with infinite precautions to prepare for lighting it. The first
burned, and the cigar drew. He had one match left, in case he dozed and
let the thing go out. Looking up through the blackness he could see a
star. He fixed his eyes on it, and leaning against the trunk drew the
smoke down into his lungs. With his arms crossed tightly on his breast
he smoked very slowly. When it was finished--what? Cold, and the wind
in the trees until the morning! Halfway through the cigar, he dozed
off, slept a long time, and woke up so cold that he could barely summon
vitality enough to strike his last match. By some miracle it burned,
and he got his cigar to draw again. This time he smoked it nearly to
its end, without mentality, almost without feeling, except the physical
sense of bitter cold. Once with a sudden clearing of the brain, he
thought faintly: ‘Thank God, I sold the--trees, and they’ll all come
down!’ The thought drifted away in frozen incoherence, drifted out like
his cigar smoke into the sleet; and with a faint grin on his lips he
dozed off again....

An under-keeper found him at ten o’clock next morning, blue from cold,
under a tall elm-tree, within a mile of his bed, one leg stretched
out, the other hunched up toward his chest, with its foot dug into the
undergrowth for warmth, his head huddled into the collar of his coat,
his arms crossed on his breast. They said he must have been dead at
least five hours. Along one side snow had drifted against him; but the
trunk had saved his back and other side. Above him, the spindly top
boughs of that tall tree were covered with green-gold clusters of tiny
crinkled elm flowers, against a deep blue sky--gay as a song of perfect
praise. The wind had dropped, and after the cold of the night the birds
were singing their clearest in the sunshine.

They did not cut down the elm-tree under which they found his body,
with the rest of the sold timber, but put a little iron fence round it,
and a little tablet on its trunk.

1920.




SANTA LUCIA


Returning from the English church at Monte Carlo towards his hotel,
old Trevillian paused at a bend in the road to rest his thin calves.
Through a mimosa-tree the sea was visible, very blue, and Trevillian’s
eyes rested on it with the filmy brown stare of old age.

Monte Carlo was changed, but that blue, tideless, impassive sea was the
same as on his first visit forty-five years ago, and this was pleasant
to one conservative by nature. Since then he had married, made money
and inherited more, ‘raised,’ as Americans called it, a family--all,
except his daughter Agatha, out in the world--had been widowed, and
developed old man’s cough. He and Agatha now left The Cedars, their
country house in Hertfordshire, for the Riviera, with the annual
regularity of swallows. Usually they stayed at Nice or Cannes, but
this year, because a friend of Agatha’s was the wife of the English
chaplain, they had chosen Monte Carlo.

It was near the end of their stay, and the April sun hot.

Trevillian passed a thin hand down his thin, brown, hairy face, where
bushy eyebrows were still dark but the pointed beard white, and the
effect, under a rather wide-brimmed brown hat, almost too Spanish for
an English bank director. He was fond of saying that some of the best
Cornish families had Spanish blood in their veins; whether Iberian or
Armadesque he did not specify. The theory in any case went well with
his formalism, growing more formal every year.

Agatha having stayed in with a cold, he had been to service by himself.
A poor gathering! The English out here were a rackety lot. Among the
congregation to whom he had that morning read the lessons he had noted,
for instance, that old blackguard Telford, who had run off with two
men’s wives in his time, and was now living with a Frenchwoman, they
said. What on earth was _he_ doing in church? And that ostracised
couple, the Gaddenhams, who had the villa near Roquebrune? She used his
name, but they had never been married, for Gaddenham’s wife was still
alive. And, more seriously, had he observed Mrs. Rolfe, who before
the war used to come with her husband--now in India--to The Cedars
to shoot the coverts in November. Young Lord Chesherford was hanging
about her, they said. That would end in scandal to a certainty. Never
without uneasiness did he see that woman, with whom his daughter was
on terms of some intimacy. Grass widows were dangerous, especially in a
place like this. He must give Agatha a hint. Such doubtful people, he
felt, had no business to attend Divine service; yet it was difficult to
disapprove of people coming to church, and, after all, most of them did
not! A man of the world, however strong a churchman, could, of course,
rub shoulders with anyone, but it was different when they came near
one’s womenfolk or into the halls of one’s formal beliefs. To encroach
like that showed no sense of the fitness of things. He must certainly
speak to Agatha.

The road had lain uphill, and he took breaths of the mimosa-scented
air, carefully regulating them so as not to provoke his cough. He was
about to proceed on his way when a piano-organ across the road burst
into tune. The man who turned the handle was the usual moustachioed
Italian with restive eyes and a game leg; the animal who drew it
the customary little grey donkey; the singer the proverbial dark
girl with an orange head-kerchief; the song she sang the immemorial
‘Santa Lucia.’ Her brassy voice blared out the full metallic ‘a’s,’
which seemed to hit the air as hammers hit the wires of a czymbal.
Trevillian had some music in his soul; he often started out for the
Casino concert, though he generally arrived in the playing-rooms,
not, indeed, to adventure more than a five-franc piece or two, for
he disapproved of gambling, but because their motley irregularity
titillated his formalism, made him feel like a boy a little out of
school. He could distinguish, however, between several tunes, and knew
this to be neither ‘God Save the King,’ ‘Rule Britannia,’ ‘Tipperary,’
nor ‘Funiculi-Funicula.’ Indeed, it had to him a kind of separate ring,
a resonance oddly intimate, as if in some other life it had been the
beating, the hammering rhythm of his heart. Queer sensation--quite
a queer sensation! And he stood, blinking. Of course, he knew that
tune now that he heard the words--Santa Lucia; but in what previous
existence had its miauling awakened something deep, hot, almost savage
within him, sweet and luring like a strange fruit or the scent of a
tropical flower? ‘San-ta Luci-i-a! San-ta Luci-i-a!’ Lost! And yet
so close to the fingers of his recollection that they itched! The
girl stopped singing and came across to him--a gaudy baggage, with
her orange scarf, her beads, the whites of her eyes, and all those
teeth! These Latins, emotional, vibrant, light-hearted and probably
light-fingered--an inferior race! He felt in his pocket, produced a
franc, and moved on slowly.

But at the next bend in the road he halted again. The girl had
recommenced, in gratitude for his franc--‘Santa Luci-ia!’ What was it
buried in him under the fallen leaves of years and years?

The pink clusters of a pepper-tree dropped from behind a low garden
wall right over him while he stood there. The air tingled with its
faint savourous perfume, true essence of the South. And again that
conviction of a previous existence, of something sweet, burning,
poignant, caught him in the Adam’s apple veiled by his beard. Was it
something he had dreamed? Was that the matter with him now--while the
organ wailed, the girl’s song vibrated? Trevillian’s stare lighted on
the prickly pears and aloes above the low, pink wall. The savagery of
those plants jerked his mind forward almost to the pitch of--what? A
youth passed, smoking a maize-coloured cigarette, leaving a perfume of
Latakia, that tobacco of his own youth when he, too, smoked cigarettes
made of its black, strong, fragrant threads. He gazed blankly at the
half-obliterated name on the dilapidated garden gate, and spelled it
aloud: “V lla Be u S te. Villa Beau Site! Beau----! By God! I’ve got
it!”

At the unbecoming vigour of his ejaculation a smile of release,
wrinkling round his eyes, furrowed his thin brown cheeks. He went up
to the gate. What a coincidence! The very----! He stood staring into a
tangled garden through the fog of forty-five years, resting his large
prayer-book with its big print on the top rail of the old green gate;
then, looking up and down the road like a boy about to steal cherries,
he lifted the latch and passed in.

Nobody lived here now, he should say. The old pink villa, glimpsed some
sixty yards away at the end of that little wilderness, was shuttered,
and its paint seemed peeling off. Beau Site! That _was_ the name! And
this the gate he had been wont to use into this lower garden, invisible
from the house. And--yes--here was the little fountain, broken and
discoloured now, with the same gargoyle face, and water still dripping
from its mouth. And here--the old stone seat his cloak had so often
covered. Grown over now, all of it; unpruned the lilacs, mimosas,
palms, making that dry rustling when the breeze crept into them. He
opened his prayer-book, laid it on the seat, and carefully sat down--he
never sat on unprotected stone. He had passed into another world,
screened from any eye by the overgrown shrubs and tangled foliage. And,
slowly, while he sat there the frost of nearly half a century thawed.

Yes! Little by little, avidly, yet as it were unwillingly, he
remembered--sitting on his prayer-book, out of the sun, under the
flowering tangled trees.

He had been twenty-six, just after he went into the family bank--he
recollected--such a very sucking partner. A neglected cold had given
him the first of those bronchial attacks of which he was now reaping
the aftermath. Those were the days when, in the chill of a London
winter, he would, dandy-like, wear thin underclothes and no overcoat.
Still coughing at Easter, he had taken three weeks off and a ticket
to Mentone. A cousin of his was engaged to a Russian girl whose
family had a villa there, and he had pitched his tent in a little
hotel almost next door. The Russians of _that_ day were the Russians
of the Turgenev novels, which Agatha had made him read. A simple,
trilingual family of gentlefolk, the Rostakovs--father, mother, and
two daughters. What was it they had called _him_--Philip Philipovitch?
Monsieur Rostakov with his beard, his witty French stories, imperfectly
understood by young Trevillian, his zest for food and drink, his thick
lips, and, as they said, his easy morals--quite a dog in his way! And
Madame, _née_ Princesse Nogárin (a Tartar strain in her, his cousin
said), ‘spirituelle,’ somewhat worn out by Monsieur Rostakov and
her belief in the transmigration of souls. And Varvara, the eldest
daughter, the one engaged; only seventeen, with deep-grey, truthful
eyes, a broad, grave face, dark hair, and a candour, by George! which
had almost frightened him. And the little one, Katrina, blue-eyed,
snub-nosed, fair-haired, with laughing lips, yet very serious too;
charming little creature, whose death from typhoid three years later
had given him quite a shock. Delightful family, seen through the
mists of time. And now in all the world you couldn’t find a Russian
family like that. Gone! Vanished from the face of the earth! Their
estates had been--ah!--somewhere in South Russia, and a house near
Yalta. Cosmopolitan, yet very Russian, with their _samovar_ and their
_zakouskas_--a word he had never learned to spell--and Rostakov’s
little glasses of white vodka, and those caviare sandwiches that the
girls and he used to take on their picnics to Gorbio and Castellar
and Belle Enda, riding donkeys, and chaperoned by that amiable young
German lady, their governess.... Germans in those days--how different
they were! How different the whole of life! The girls riding in their
wide skirts, under parasols, the air unspoiled by the fumes of petrol,
the carriages with their jangling-belled little horses and bright
harness; priests in black; soldiers in bright trousers and yellow
shakoes; and beggars--plenty. The girls would gather wild flowers and
press them afterwards; and in the evening Varvara would look at him
with her grave eyes and ask him whether he believed in a future life.
He had no beliefs to speak of then, if he remembered rightly; they had
come with increasing income, family, and business responsibilities.
It had always seemed to hurt her that he thought of sport and dress,
and not of his soul. The Russians in those days seemed so tremendously
concerned about the soul--an excellent thing, of course, but not what
one talked of. Still, that first fortnight had been quite idyllic. He
remembered one Sunday afternoon--queer how such a little thing could
stay in the mind!--on the beach near Cap Martin flicking sand off his
boots with his handkerchief and Varvara saying: “And then to your face
again, Philip Philipovitch?” She was always saying things which made
him feel uncomfortable. And in the little letter which Katrina wrote
him a year later, with blue forget-me-nots all about the paper, she had
reminded him of how he had blushed. Charming young girls--simple--no
such nowadays! The dew was off. They had thought Monte Carlo a vulgar
place. What would they think of it now, by Jove! Even Rostakov only
went there on the quiet--a _viveur_ that fellow, who would always be
living a double life. Trevillian recollected how, under the spell of
that idyllic atmosphere, and afraid of Varvara’s eyes, he himself had
put off from day to day his visit to the celebrated haunt, until one
evening when Madame Rostakov had _migraine_ and the girls were at a
party he had sauntered to the station and embarked on a Monte Carlo
train. How clearly it came back to him--the winding path up through
the Gardens, a beautiful still evening, scented and warm, the Casino
orchestra playing the Love music from ‘Faust,’ the one opera that he
knew well. The darkness, strange with exotic foliage, glimmering with
golden lamps--none of this glaring white electric light--had deeply
impressed him, who, for all his youthful dandyism, had Puritanism in
his blood and training. It was like going up to--well, not precisely
heaven. And in his white beard old Trevillian uttered a slight cackle.
Anyway, he had entered ‘the rooms’ with a beating heart. He had no
money to throw away in those days; by Jove, no! His father had kept him
strictly to an allowance of four hundred a year, and his partnership
was still in the apprentice stage. He had only some ten or twenty
pounds to spare. But to go back to England and have his fellows say,
“What? Monte Carlo, and never played?” was not to be thought of.

His first sensation in ‘the rooms’ was disappointing. The decorations
were florid, the people foreign, queer, ugly! For some time he stood
still listening to the chink of rake against coin, and the nasal twang
of the croupiers’ voices. Then he had gone up to a table to watch the
game, which he had never played. That, at all events, was the same as
now; that and the expression on the gamblers’ faces--the sharp, blind,
crab-like absorption like no other human expression. And what a lot
of old women! A nervous excitement had crept into his brain while he
stood there, an itch into his fingers. But he was shy. All these people
played with such deadly calm, seemed so utterly familiar with it all.
At last he had reached over the shoulder of a dark-haired woman sitting
in front of him, put down a five-franc piece, and called out the
word ‘_Vingt_.’ A rake shovelled it forward on to the number with an
indifferent click. The ball rolled. “_Quatorze, rouge pair et manque._”
His five-franc piece was raked away. But he, Philip Trevillian, had
gambled at Monte Carlo, and at once he had seemed to see Varvara’s eyes
with something of amusement in their candour, and to hear her voice:
“But to gamble! How silly, Philip Philipovitch!” Then the man sitting
to his left got up, and he had slipped down into the empty chair. Once
seated, he knew that he must play. So he pushed another five-franc
piece on to black and received its counterpart. Now he was quits; and,
continuing that simple stake with varying success, he began taking
in the faces of his neighbours. On his left he had an old Englishman
in evening dress, ruddy, with chubby lips, who played in gold pieces
and seemed winning rather heavily. Opposite, in a fabulous shawl, a
bird-like old woman, with a hook nose, and a man who looked like a
Greek bandit in a frock-coat. To his right was the dark-haired woman
over whose shoulder he had leaned. An agreeable perfume, as of jasmine
blossoms, floated from her. She had some tablets and six or seven gold
pieces before her, but seemed to have stopped playing. Out of the tail
of his eye Trevillian scrutinised her profile. She was by far the most
attractive woman he had seen in here. And he felt suddenly uninterested
in the fate of his five-franc pieces. Under the thin, dark brows, a
little drawn down, he could see that her eyes were dark and velvety.
Her face was rather pointed, delicate, faintly powdered in the foreign
fashion. She wore a low dress, but with a black lace scarf thrown over
her gleaming shoulders, and something that glimmered in her dark hair.
She was not English, but what he could not tell. He won twice running
on black, left his stake untouched, and was conscious that she pushed
one of her own gold pieces on to black. Again black won. Again he left
his stake, and she hers. To be linked with her by that following of his
luck was agreeable to young Trevillian. The devil might care--he would
leave his winnings down. Again and again, till he had won eight times
on black, he left his stake, and his neighbour followed suit. A pile of
gold was mounting in front of each of them. The eyes of the hawk-like
old woman opposite, like those of a crustacean in some book of natural
history, seemed pushed out from her face; a little hard smile on her
thin lips seemed saying, ‘Wait; it will all go back!’ The jasmine
perfume from his neighbour grew stronger, as though disengaged by
increasing emotion; he could see her white neck heave under its black
lace. She reached her hand out as though to gather in her winnings.
In bravado Trevillian sat unmoving. Her eyes slid round to his; she
withdrew her hand. The little ball rolled. Black! He heard her sigh of
relief. She touched his arm. “_Retirez!_” she whispered, “_Retirez,
monsieur!_” and, sweeping in her winnings, she got up. Trevillian
hesitated just a moment, then with the thought, ‘If I stay I lose
sight of her,’ he, too, reached out, and, gathering in his pile, left
the table. Starting with a five-franc piece, in nine successful coups
he had won just over a hundred pounds. His neighbour, who had started
with a louis, in seven coups--he calculated rapidly--must have won the
same. “_Seize, rouge pair et manque!_” Just in time! Elated, Trevillian
turned away. There was the graceful figure of his dark neighbour
threading the throng, and without deliberate intention, yet longing not
to lose sight of her, he followed. A check in her progress brought him
so close, however, that he was at infinite pains to seem unconscious.
She turned and saw him. “Ah! _Merci, monsieur!_ I tank you moch.” “It’s
for me to thank you!” he stammered. The dark lady smiled. “I have the
instinct,” she said in her broken English, “for others, not for myself.
I am unlucky. It is the first time you play, sare? I tought so. Do not
play again. Give me that promise; it will make me ’appy.”

Her eyes were looking into his. Never in his life had he seen anything
so fascinating as her face with its slightly teasing smile, her figure
in the lacy black dress swinging out Spanish fashion from the hips,
and the scarf flung about her shoulders. He had made the speech then
which afterwards seemed to him so foreign.

“Charmed to promise anything that will make you happy, madame.”

She clasped her hands like a pleased child.

“That is a bargain; now I have repaid you.”

“May I find your carriage?”

“I am walkin’, monsieur.”

With desperate courage he had murmured:

“Then may I escort you?”

“But certainly.”

Sitting on his prayer-book, Trevillian burrowed into the past. What
had he felt, thought, fancied, in those moments while she had gone to
get her cloak? Who and what was she? Into what whirlpool drawing him?
How nearly he had bolted--back to the idyllic, to Varvara’s searching
candour and Katrina’s laughing innocence, before she was there beside
him, lace veiling her hair, face, eyes, like an Eastern woman, and
her fingers had slipped under his sleeve.... What a walk! What sense
of stepping into the unknown; strange intimacy and perfect ignorance!
Perhaps every man had some such moment in his life--of pure romance,
of adventuring at all and any cost. He had restrained the impulse to
press that slender hand closely to his side, had struggled to preserve
the perfect delicacy worthy of the touching confidence of so beautiful
a lady. Italian, Spanish, Polish, Bohemian? Married, widowed? She told
him nothing; he asked no questions. Instinct or shyness kept him dumb,
but with a whirling brain. And the night above them had seemed the
starriest ever seen, the sweetest scented, the most abandoned by all
except himself and her. They had come to the gate of this very garden,
and, opening it, she had said:

“Here is my home. You have been perfect for me, monsieur.”

Her lightly resting fingers were withdrawn. Trevillian remembered, with
a sort of wonder, how he had kissed those fingers.

“I am always at your service, madame.”

Her lips had parted; her eyes had an arch sweetness he had never seen
before or since in woman.

“Every night I play. _Au revoir!_”

He had listened to her footsteps on the path, watched lights go up in
the house which looked so empty now behind him, watched them put out
again, and, retracing his steps, had learned by heart their walk from
the Casino, till he was sure he could not miss his way to that garden
gate by day or night.... A fluster of breeze came into the jungle
where he sat, and released the dry rustle of the palm-tree leaves. “_On
fait des folies!_” as the French put it. Loose lot, the French! Queer
what young men would go through when they were ‘making madnesses.’
And, plucking a bit of lilac, old Trevillian put it to his nose, as
though seeking explanation for the madnesses of youth. What had he been
like then? Thin as a lath, sunburnt--he used to pride himself on being
sunburnt--a little black moustache, a dandy about clothes. The memory
of his youthful looks warmed him, sitting there, chilly from old age....

“_On fait des folies!_” All next day he had been restless, uneasy,
at the Villa Rosakov under the question in Varvara’s eyes, and Lord
knew what excuse he had made for not going there that evening! Ah! And
what of his solemn resolutions to find out all about his dark lady,
not to run his head into some foreign noose, not to compromise her or
himself? They had all gone out of his head the moment he set eyes on
her again, and he had never learned anything but her name--Iñez--in
all those three weeks, nor told anything of himself, as if both had
felt that knowledge must destroy romance. When had he known himself of
interest to her--the second night, the third? The look in her eyes! The
pressure of her arm against his own! On this very seat, with his cloak
spread to guard her from the chill, he had whispered his turbulent
avowals. Not free! No such woman could be free. What did it matter?
Disinheritance--ostracism--exile! All such considerations had burned
like straws in the fire he had felt, sitting by her in the darkness,
his arm about her, her shoulder pressed to his. With mournful mockery
she had gazed at him, kissed his forehead, slipped away up the dark
garden. God, what a night after that! Wandering up and down along by
the sea--devoured. Funny to look back on--deuced funny! A woman’s
face to have such power. And with a little shock he remembered that
never in all the few weeks of that mad business had he seen her face
by daylight! Of course, he had left Mentone at once--no offering his
madness up to the candid eyes of those two girls, to the cynical stare
of that old _viveur_ Rostakov. But no going home, though his leave
was up; he was his own master yet awhile, thanks to his winnings.
And then--the deluge. Literally--a night when the rain came down
in torrents, drenching him through cape and clothes while he stood
waiting for her. It was after that drenching night which had kept
them apart that she had returned his passion.... A wild young devil!
The madness of those nights beneath these trees by the old fountain!
How he used to sit waiting on this bench in the darkness with heart
fluttering, trembling, aching with expectancy!... Gad, how he had ached
and fluttered on that seat! What fools young men could be! And yet in
all his life had there been weeks so wildly sweet as those? Weeks the
madness of which could stir in him still this strange youthful warmth.
Rubbing his veined, thin hands together, he held them out into a streak
of sunlight and closed his eyes.... There, coming through the gate
into the deeper shadow, dark in her black dress--always black--the
gleam of her neck when she bent and pressed his head to it! Through
the rustling palm-leaves the extinct murmuring of their two voices,
the beating of their two hearts.... Madness indeed! His back gave a
little crick. He had been very free from lumbago lately. Confound it--a
premonitory twinge! Close to his feet a lizard rustled out into the
patch of sunlight, motionless but for tongue and eyes, looked at him
with head to one side--queer, quick, dried-looking little object!...
And then--the end! What a Jezebel of cruelty he had thought her! Now
he could see its wisdom and its mercy. By George! She had blown their
wild weeks out like a candle-flame! Vanished! Vanished into the unknown
as she had come from the unknown; left him to go, haggard and burnt-up,
back to England and bank routine, to the social and moral solidity of a
pillar of society....

Like that lizard whisking its tail and vanishing beneath the dead dry
leaves, so she had vanished--as if into the earth. Could she ever have
felt for him as he for her? Did women ever know such consuming fires?
Trevillian shrugged his thin shoulders. She had seemed to; but--how
tell? Queer cattle--women!

Two nights he had sat here, waiting, sick with anxiety and longing.
A third day he had watched outside the villa, closed, shuttered,
abandoned; not a sound from it, not a living thing, but one
white-and-yellow cat. He pitied himself even now, thinking of that last
vigil. For three days more he had hung around, haunting Casino, garden,
villa. No sign! No sign!...

Trevillian rose; his back had given him another twinge. He examined the
seat and his open prayer-book. Had he overlapped it, on to damp stone?
He frowned, smoothing superstitiously the pages a little creased and
over-flattened by his weight. Closing the book, he went towards the
gate. Had those passionate hours been the best or the worst of his
life? He did not know.

He moved out into the hot sunshine and up the road. Round the corner
he came suddenly abreast of the old villa. ‘It was here I stood,’ he
thought; ‘just here!’ What was that caterwauling? Ah! The girl and
the organ--there they were again! What! Why, of course! That long-ago
morning a barrel organ had come while he stood there in despair. He
could see it still, grinding away, with a monkey on it, and a woman
singing that same silly tune. With a dry, dusty feeling he turned and
walked on. What had he been thinking of before? Oh, ah! The Rolfe woman
and that young fool Chesherford. Yes, he would certainly warn Agatha,
certainly warn her. They were a loose lot out here!

1921.




BLACKMAIL


I

The affectionate if rather mocking friend who had said of Charles
Granter, “He isn’t a man, he’s an edifice,” seemed justified to the
thin dark man following him down Oakley Street, Chelsea, that early
October afternoon. From the square foundations of his feet to his
square fair beard and the top of his head under a square black bowler,
he looked solid as granite, indestructible--too big to be taken by the
board--only fit to be submarined. And the man dodging in his wake right
down to the Embankment ran up once or twice under his counter and fell
behind again as if appalled by the vessel’s size and unconsciousness.
Considering the heat of the past summer the plane-trees were still
very green, and few of their twittering leaves had dropped or turned
yellow--just enough to confirm the glamorous melancholy of early fall.
Granter, though he lived with his wife in some mansions close by, went
out of his way to pass under those trees and look at the river. This
seeming sign of weakness, perhaps, determined the shadowy man to dodge
up again and become stationary close behind. Ravaged and streaked, as
if he had lived submerged, he stood carefully noting with his darting
dark eyes that they were quite alone; then, swallowing violently so
that the strings of his lean neck writhed, he moved stealthily up
beside Granter, and said in a hurried, hoarse voice: “Beg pardon,
mister--ten pound, and I’ll say nothin’.”

The face which Granter turned toward that surprising utterance was
a good illustration of the saying ‘things are not what they seem.’
Above that big building of a body it quivered, ridiculously alive and
complex, as of a man full of nerves, humours, sarcasms; and a deep
continuous chinking sound arose--of Charles Granter jingling coins in
his trousers’ pocket. The quiver settled into raised eyebrows, into
crow’s-feet running out on to the broad cheekbones, into a sarcastic
smile drooping the corners of the lips between moustache and beard. He
said in his rather high voice:

“What’s the matter with you, my friend?”

“There’s a lot the matter with me, mister. Down and out I am. I know
where you live, I know your lady; but--ten pound and I’ll say nothin’.”

“About what?”

“About your visiting that gell, where you’ve just come from. Ten pound.
It’s cheap--I’m a man of me word.”

With lips still sarcastically drooped, Granter made a little derisive
sound. “Blackmail, by George!”

“Guv’nor--I’m desperate, I mean to have that ten pound. You give it me
here at six o’clock this evenin’, if you ’aven’t got it on you.” His
eyes flared suddenly in his hungry face. “But no tricks! I ain’t killed
Huns for nothin’.”

Granter surveyed him for a moment, then turned his back and looked at
the water.

“Well, you’ve got two hours to get it in--six o’clock, mister, just
here; and no tricks--I warn you.”

The hoarse voice ceased, the sound of footsteps died away; Granter was
alone. The smile still clung to his lips, but he was not amused; he was
annoyed with the measured indignation of a big man highly civilised and
innocent. Where had this ruffian sprung from? To be spied on, without
knowing it, like this! His ears grew red. The damned scoundrel!

The thing was too absurd to pay attention to. But, instantly, his
highly-sophisticated consciousness began to pay it attention. How many
visits had he made to this distressed flower-girl? Three? And all
because he didn’t like handing over the case to that society which
always found out the worst. They said private charity was dangerous.
Apparently it was! Blackmail! A consideration came, perching like
a crow on the branches of his mind: Why hadn’t he mentioned the
flower-girl to his wife and made _her_ do the visiting? Why! Because
Olga would have said the girl was a fraud. And perhaps she was! A
put-up job! Would the scoundrel have ventured on this threat at all if
the girl were not behind him? She might support him with lies! His wife
might believe them--she--she had such a vein of cynicism! How sordid,
how domestically unpleasant!

Granter felt quite sick. Every decent human value seemed suddenly in
question. And a second crow came croaking: Could one leave a scoundrel
like this to play his tricks with impunity? Oughtn’t one to go to the
police? He stood extraordinarily still--a dappled leaf dropped from
a plane-tree and lodged on his bowler hat; at the other end of him a
little dog mistook him for a lamp-post. This was no joke! For a man
with a reputation for humanity, integrity and common sense--no joke
at all! A police court meant the prosecution of a fellow-creature;
getting him perhaps a year’s imprisonment, when one had always felt
that punishment practically never fitted crime! Staring at the river
he seemed to see cruelty hovering over himself, his wife, society, the
flower-girl, even over that scoundrel--naked cruelty, waiting to pounce
on one or all. Which ever way one turned the thing was dirty, cruel.
No wonder blackmail was accounted such a heinous crime. No other human
act was so cold-blooded, spider-like, and slimy; none plunged so deadly
a dagger into the bowels of compassion, so eviscerated humanity, so
murdered faith! And it would have been even worse, if his conscience
had not been clear. But was it so extremely clear? Would he have taken
the trouble to go to that flower-girl’s dwelling, not once but three
times, unless she had been attractive, unless her dark-brown eyes had
been pretty, and her common voice so soft? Would he have visited the
blowsy old flower-woman at that other corner, in circumstances, no
doubt, just as strenuous? Honestly: No. Still, if he did like a pretty
face he was not vicious--he was fastidious and detested subterfuge.
But then Olga was so cynical, she would certainly ask him why he
hadn’t visited the old flower-woman as well, and the lame man who sold
matches, and all the other stray unfortunates of the neighbourhood.
_Well_, there it was; and a bold course always the best! The bold
course--which was it? To go to the police? To his wife? To that girl,
and find out if she were in this ramp? To wait till six o’clock, meet
the ruffian and shake the teeth out of him? Granter could not decide.
All seemed equally bold--would do equally well. And a fifth course
presented itself which seemed even bolder: Ignore the thing!

The tide had just turned, and the full waters below him were very
still, of a sunlit soft grey colour. This stillness of the river
restored to Charles Granter something of the impersonal mood in which
he had crossed the Embankment to look at it. Here, by the mother stream
of this great town, was he, tall, strong, well-fed, and, if not rich,
quite comfortable; and here, too, were hundreds of thousands like
that needy flower-girl and this shadowy scoundrel skating on the edge
of destitution. And here was this water--to him a source of æsthetic
enjoyment; to them--a possible last refuge. The girl had talked of
it--beggar’s patter, perhaps, like the blackmailer’s words: “I’m
desperate--I’m down and out.”

One wanted to be just! If he had known all about them--but he knew
nothing!

‘Can’t believe she’s such an ungrateful little wretch!’ he thought;
‘I’ll go back and see her.’

He retraced his way up Oakley Street to the mews which she inhabited,
and ascended a stairway scented with petrol. Through the open doorway
he could see her baby, of doubtful authorship, seated in an empty
flower-basket--a yellow baby, who stared up at him with the placidity
of one recently fed. That stare seemed to Granter to be saying: ‘You
look out that you’re not taken for my author. Have you got an alibi,
old man?’ And almost unconsciously he began to calculate where he
had been about fourteen or fifteen months ago. Not in London--thank
goodness! In Brittany with his wife--all that July, August, and
September. Jingling his money, he contemplated the baby. It seemed
more, but it _might_ be only four months old! The baby opened a
toothless mouth, “Ga” it said, and stretched out a tiny hand. Granter
ceased to jingle the coins and gazed round the room. The first time he
came, a month ago, to test her street-corner story, its condition had
been deplorable. His theory that people were never better than their
environments had prompted the second visit, and that of this afternoon.
He had wanted to know that he was not throwing away his money. And
there certainly was some appearance of comfort now in a room so small
that he and the baby and a bed almost filled it. But he felt a fool
for ever having come there even with those best intentions which were
the devil. And, turning to go, he saw the girl herself ascending the
stairs, a paper bag in her hand, an evident bull’s-eye in her mouth,
for a scent of peppermint preceded her. Surely her cheekbones were
higher than he had thought, her eyebrows more oblique--a gipsy look!
Her eyes, dark and lustrous as a hound puppy’s, smiled at him, and he
said in his rather high voice:

“I came back to ask you something.”

“Yes, sir.”

“Do you know a dark man with a thin face and a slight squint, who’s
been in the Army?”

“What’s his name, sir?”

“I don’t know; but he followed me from here, and tried to blackmail me
on the Embankment. You know what blackmail is?”

“No, sir.”

Feline, swift, furtive, she had passed him and taken up her baby,
slanting her dark glance at him from behind it. Granter experienced
a very queer sensation. Really it was as if--though he disliked
poetic emphasis--as if he had suddenly seen something pre-civilised,
pre-human, snake-like, cat-like, monkey-like too, in those dark sliding
eyes and that yellow baby. She was in it; or, if not in it, she knew of
it!

“A dangerous game, that,” he said. “Tell him--for his own good--he had
better drop it.”

And, while he went, very square, downstairs, he thought: ‘This is one
of the finest opportunities you ever had for getting to the bottom of
human nature, and you’re running away from it.’ So strongly did this
thought obsess him that he halted, in two minds, outside. A chauffeur,
who was cleaning his car, looked at him curiously. Charles Granter
moved away.


II

When he reached the little drawing-room of their flat his wife was
making tea. She was rather short, with a good figure, and brown eyes
in a flattish face, powdered and by no means unattractive. She had
Slav blood in her--Polish; and Granter never now confided to her the
finer shades of his thoughts and conduct because she had long made him
feel himself her superior in moral sensibility. He had no wish to feel
superior--it was often very awkward; but he could not help it. In view
of this attempt at blackmail, more than awkward. It was extraordinarily
unpleasant to fall from a pedestal on which he did not wish to be.

He sat down, very large, in a lacquered chair with black cushions,
spoke of the leaves turning, saw her look at him and smile, and felt
that she knew he was disturbed.

“Do you ever wonder,” he said, tinkling his teaspoon, “about the lives
that other people live?”

“What sort of people, Charles?”

“Oh--not our sort; match-sellers, don’t you know, flower-sellers,
people down and out?”

“No, I don’t think I do.”

If only he could tell her of this monstrous incident without slipping
from his pedestal!

“It interests me enormously; there are such queer depths to reach,
don’t you know.”

Her smile seemed to answer: ‘You don’t reach the depths in me.’ And it
was true. She was very Slav, with the warm gleam in her eyes and the
opaque powdered skin of her comely face. An enigma--flatly an enigma!
There were deep waters below the pedestal, like--like Philæ, with
columns still standing in the middle of the Nile Dam. Absurd thought!

“I’ve often wondered,” he said, “how I should feel if I were down and
out.”

“You’re too large, Charles, and too dignified, my dear; you’d be on the
Civil List before you could turn round.”

Granter rose from the lacquered chair, jingling his coins. The most
vivid pictures at that moment were, like a film, unrolled before his
mind--of the grey sunlit river and that accosting blackguard with his
twisted murky face and lips uttering hoarse sounds; of the yellow baby,
and the girl’s gipsy-dark glance from behind it; of a police court, and
himself standing there and letting the whole cartload of the law fall
on them. He said suddenly:

“I was blackmailed this afternoon on the Embankment.”

She did not answer; and, turning with irritation, he saw that her
fingers were in her ears.

“I do wish you wouldn’t jingle your money so!” she said.

Confound it! She had not heard him.

“I’ve had an adventure,” he began again. “You know the flower-girl who
stands at that corner in Tite Street?”

“Yes; a gipsy baggage.”

“H’m! Well, I bought a flower from her one day, and she told me such a
pathetic story that I went to her den to see if it was true. It seemed
to be, so I gave her some money, don’t you know. Then I thought I’d
better see how she was spending it, so I went to see her again, don’t
you know.”

A faint “Oh! Charles!” caused him to hurry on.

“And--what do you think--a blackguard followed me to-day and tried to
blackmail me for ten pounds on the Embankment.”

A sound brought his face round to attention. His wife was lying back on
the cushions of her chair in paroxysms of soft laughter.

It was clear to Granter, then, that what he had really been afraid of
was just this. His wife would laugh at him--laugh at him slipping from
the pedestal! Yes! It was that he had dreaded--not any disbelief in
his fidelity. Somehow he felt too large to be laughed at. He _was_ too
large! Nature had set a size beyond which husbands----!

“I don’t see what there is to laugh at,” he said frigidly. “There’s no
more odious crime than blackmail.”

His wife was silent; tears were trickling down her cheeks.

“Did you give it him?” she said in a strangled voice.

“Of course not.”

“What was he threatening?”

“To tell you.”

“But what?”

“His beastly interpretation of my harmless visits.”

The tears had made runlets in her powder, and he added viciously: “He
doesn’t know you, of course.”

His wife dabbed her eyes, and a scent of geranium arose.

“It seems to me,” said Granter, “that you’d be even more amused if
there _were_ something in it!”

“Oh, no, Charles, but--perhaps there is.”

Granter looked at her fixedly.

“I’m sorry to disappoint you, there is not.”

He saw her cover her lips with that rag of handkerchief, and abruptly
left the room.

He went into his study and sat down before the fire. So it was funny
to be a faithful husband? And suddenly he thought: ‘If my wife can
treat this as a joke, what--what about herself?’ A nasty thought! An
unconscionable thought! Really, it was as though that blackmailing
scoundrel had dirtied human nature till it seemed to function only from
low motives. A church clock chimed. Six already! The ruffian would be
back there on the Embankment waiting for his ten pounds. Granter rose.
His duty was to go out and hand him over to the police.

‘No!’ he thought viciously, ‘let him come here! I’d very much like him
to come here. I’d teach him!’

But a sort of shame beset him. Like most very big men, he was quite
unaccustomed to violence--had never struck a violent blow in his life,
not even in his school-days--had never had occasion to. He went across
to the window. From there he could just see the Embankment parapet
through the trees in the failing light, and presently--sure enough--he
made out the fellow’s figure slinking up and down like a hungry dog.
He stood watching, jingling his money--nervous, sarcastic, angry, very
interested. What would the rascal do now? Would he beard this great
block of flats? And was the girl down there too--the girl, with her
yellow baby? He saw the slinking figure cross from the far side and
vanish under the loom of the mansions. In that interesting moment
Granter burst through the bottom of one of his trousers’ pockets;
several coins jingled on to the floor and rolled away. He was still
looking for the last when he heard the door-bell ring--he had never
really believed the ruffian would come up! Straightening himself
abruptly, he went out into the hall. Service was performed by the
mansion’s staff, so there was no one in the flat but himself and his
wife. The bell rang again; and she, too, appeared.

“This is my Embankment friend, no doubt, who amuses you so much. I
should like you to see him,” he said grimly. He noted a quizzical
apology on her face and opened the hall door.

Yes! there stood the man! By electric light, in upholstered
surroundings, more ‘down and out’ than ever. A bad lot, but a miserable
poor wretch, with his broken boots, his thin, twisted, twitching face,
his pinched shabby figure--only his hungry eyes looked dangerous.

“Come in,” said Granter. “You want to see my wife, I think.”

The man recoiled.

“I don’t want to see ’er,” he muttered, “unless you force me to. Give
us _five_ pound, guv’nor, and I won’t worry you again. I don’t want to
cause trouble between man and wife.”

“Come in,” repeated Granter; “she’s expecting you.”

The man stood, silently passing a pale tongue over a pale upper lip, as
though conjuring some new resolution from his embarrassment.

“Now, see ’ere, mister,” he said suddenly, “you’ll regret it if I come
in--you will, straight.”

“I shall regret it if you don’t. You’re a very interesting fellow, and
an awful scoundrel.”

“Well, who made me one?” the man burst out; “you answer me that.”

“Are you coming in?”

“Yes, I am.”

He came, and Granter shut the door behind him. It was like inviting
a snake or a mad dog into one’s parlour; but the memory of having
been laughed at was so fresh within him that he rather welcomed the
sensation.

“Now,” he said, “have the kindness!” and opened the drawing-room door.

The man slunk in, blinking in the stronger light.

Granter went towards his wife, who was standing before the fire.

“This gentleman has an important communication to make to you, it
seems.”

The expression of her face struck him as peculiar--surely she was not
frightened! And he experienced a kind of pleasure in seeing them both
look so exquisitely uncomfortable.

“Well,” he said ironically, “perhaps you’d like me not to listen.” And,
going back to the door, he stood leaning against it with his hands up
to his ears. He saw the fellow give him a furtive look and go nearer to
her; his lips moved rapidly, hers answered, and he thought: ‘What on
earth am I covering my ears for?’ He took his hands away, and the man
turned round.

“I’m goin’ now, mister; a little mistake--sorry to ’ave troubled you.”

His wife had turned to the fire again; and with a puzzled feeling
Granter opened the door. As the fellow passed he took him by the arm,
twisted him round into the study, and, locking the door, put the key
into his pocket.

“Now then,” he said, “you precious scoundrel!”

The man shifted on his broken boots. “Don’t you hit me, guv’nor, I got
a knife here.”

“I’m not going to hit you. I’m going to hand you over to the police.”

The man’s eyes roved, looking for a way of escape; then rested, as if
fascinated, on the glowing hearth.

“What’s ten pounds?” he said suddenly; “you’d never ha’ missed it.”

Granter smiled.

“You don’t seem to realise, my friend, that blackmail is the most
devilish crime a man can commit.” And he crossed over to the telephone.

The man’s eyes, dark, restless, violent, and yet hungry, began to shift
up and down the building of a man before him.

“No,” he said suddenly, with a sort of pathos, “don’t do that, guv’nor!”

The look of his eyes, or the tone of his voice, affected Granter.

“But if I don’t,” he said slowly, “you’ll be blackmailing the next
person you meet. You’re as dangerous as a viper.”

The man’s lips quivered; he covered them with his hand, and said from
behind it:

“I’m a man like yourself. I’m down and out--that’s all. Look at me!”

Granter’s glance dwelt on the trembling hand. “Yes, but you fellows
destroy all belief in human nature,” he said vehemently.

“See ’ere, guv’nor; you try livin’ like me--you try it! My Gawd! You
try my life these last six months--cadgin’ and crawlin’ for a job!” He
made a deep sound. “A man ’oo’s done ’is bit, too. Wot life is it? A
stinkin’ life, not fit for a dawg, let alone a ’uman bein’. An’ when I
see a great big chap like you, beggin’ your pardon, mister, well fed,
with everything to ’is ’and--it was regular askin’ for it. It come over
me, it did.”

“No, no,” said Granter grimly; “that won’t do. It couldn’t have been
sudden. You calculated--you concocted this. Blackmail is sheer filthy
cold-blooded blackguardism. You don’t care two straws whom you hurt,
whose lives you wreck, what faiths you destroy.” And he put his hand on
the receiver.

The man squirmed.

“Steady on, guv’nor! I’ve gotta find food. I’ve gotta find clothes. I
can’t live on air. I can’t go naked.”

Granter stood motionless, while the man’s voice continued to travel to
him across the cosy room.

“Give us a chawnce, guv’nor! Ah! give us a chawnce! You can’t
understand my temptations. Don’t have the police to me. I won’t do this
again--give you me word--so ’elp me! I’ve got it in the neck. Let me
go, guv’nor!”

In Granter, motionless as the flats he lived in, a heavy struggle was
in progress--not between duty and pity, but between revengeful anger
and a sort of horror at using the strength of prosperity against so
broken a wretch.

“Let me go, mister!” came the hoarse voice again. “Be a sport!”

Granter dropped the receiver and unlocked the door.

“All right; you can go.”

The man crossed swiftly.

“Christ!” he said; “good luck! And as to the lady--I take it back. I
never see ’er. It’s all me eye.”

He was across the hall and gone before Granter could decide what to
say; the scurrying shuffle of his footsteps down the stairs died away.
‘And as to the lady--I take it back. I never see ’er. It’s all me
eye!’ Good God! The scoundrel, having failed with him, had been trying
to blackmail his wife--his wife, who had laughed at his fidelity--his
wife, who had looked--frightened! ‘All me eye!’ Her face started up
before Granter--_scared_ under its powder, with a mask drawn over it.
And he had let that scoundrel go!... But why--scared? Blackmail--of all
poisonous human actions!... Why scared?... What now ...!

1921.




THE BROKEN BOOT


The actor, Gilbert Caister, who had been ‘out’ for six months, emerged
from his East Coast seaside lodging about noon in the day, after the
opening of ‘Shooting the Rapids,’ on tour, in which he was playing Dr.
Dominick in the last act. A salary of four pounds a week would not,
he was conscious, remake his fortunes, but a certain jauntiness had
returned to the gait and manner of one employed again at last.

Fixing his monocle, he stopped before a fishmonger’s and, with a
faint smile on his face, regarded a lobster. Ages since he had eaten
a lobster! One could long for a lobster without paying, but the
pleasure was not solid enough to detain him. He moved upstreet and
stopped again, before a tailor’s window. Together with the actual
tweeds, in which he could so easily fancy himself refitted, he could
see a reflection of himself, in the faded brown suit wangled out of
the production of ‘Marmaduke Mandeville’ the year before the war.
The sunlight in this damned town was very strong, very hard on seams
and buttonholes, on knees and elbows! Yet he received the ghost of
æsthetic pleasure from the reflected elegance of a man long fed only
twice a day, of an eyeglass well rimmed out from a soft brown eye, of
a velour hat salved from the production of ‘Educating Simon’ in 1912;
and, in front of the window he removed that hat, for under it was his
new phenomenon, not yet quite evaluated, his _mêche blanche_. Was it an
asset, or the beginning of the end? It reclined backwards on the right
side, conspicuous in his dark hair, above that shadowy face always
interesting to Gilbert Caister. They said it came from atrophy of
the--er--something nerve, an effect of the war, or of under-nourished
tissue. Rather distinguished, perhaps, but----!

He walked on, and became conscious that he had passed a face he
knew. Turning, he saw it also turned on a short and dapper figure--a
face rosy, bright, round, with an air of cherubic knowledge, as of a
getter-up of amateur theatricals.

Bryce-Green, by George!

“Caister? It is! Haven’t seen you since you left the old camp. Remember
what sport we had over ‘Gotta Grampus’? By Jove! I am glad to see you.
Doing anything with yourself? Come and have lunch with me.”

Bryce-Green, the wealthy patron, the moving spirit of entertainment
in that South Coast convalescent camp. And, drawling slightly, Caister
answered:

“Shall be delighted.” But within him something did not drawl: ‘By God,
you’re going to have a feed, my boy!’

And--elegantly threadbare, roundabout and dapper--the two walked side
by side.

“Know this place? Let’s go in here! Phyllis, cocktails for my friend
Mr. Caister and myself, and caviare on biscuits. Mr. Caister is playing
here! you must go and see him.”

The girl who served the cocktails and the caviare looked up at Caister
with interested blue eyes. Precious! He had been ‘out’ for six months!

“Nothing of a part,” he drawled; “took it to fill a gap.” And below his
waistcoat the gap echoed: ‘Yes, and it’ll take some filling.’

“Bring your cocktail along, Caister; we’ll go into the little further
room, there’ll be nobody there. What shall we have--a lobstah?”

And Caister murmured: “I love lobstahs.”

“Very fine and large here. And how are you, Caister? So awfully glad to
see you--only real actor we had.”

“Thanks,” said Caister, “I’m all right.” And he thought: ‘He’s a
damned amateur, but a nice little man.’

“Sit here. Waiter, bring us a good big lobstah and a salad; and
then--er--a small fillet of beef with potatoes fried crisp, and a
bottle of my special hock. Ah! and a rum omelette--plenty of rum and
sugah. Twig?”

And Caister thought: ‘Thank God, I do.’

They had sat down opposite each other at one of two small tables in the
little recessed room.

“Luck!” said Bryce-Green.

“Luck!” replied Caister; and the cocktail trickling down him echoed:
‘Luck!’

“And what do you think of the state of the drama?” Oh! ho! A question
after his own heart. Balancing his monocle by a sweetish smile on the
opposite side of his mouth, Caister drawled his answer: “Quite too
bally awful!”

“H’m! Yes,” said Bryce-Green; “nobody with any genius, is there?”

And Caister thought: ‘Nobody with any money.’

“Have you been playing anything great? You were so awfully good in
‘Gotta Grampus’!”

“Nothing particular. I’ve been--er--rather slack.” And with their feel
around his waist his trousers seemed to echo: ‘Slack!’

“Ah!” said Bryce-Green. “Here we are! Do you like claws?”

“Tha-a-nks. Anything!” To eat--until warned by the pressure of his
waist against his trousers! Huh! What a feast! And what a flow of
his own tongue suddenly released--on drama, music, art; mellow and
critical, stimulated by the round eyes and interjections of his little
provincial host.

“By Jove, Caister! You’ve got a _mêche blanche_. Never noticed. I’m
awfully interested in _mêches blanches_. Don’t think me too frightfully
rude--but did it come suddenly?”

“No, gradually.”

“And how do you account for it?”

‘Try starvation,’ trembled on Caister’s lips.

“I don’t.”

“I think it’s ripping. Have some more omelette? I often wish I’d gone
on the regular stage myself. Must be a topping life, if one has talent,
like you.”

Topping?

“Have a cigar. Waiter! Coffee and cigars. I shall come and see you
to-night. Suppose you’ll be here a week?”

Topping! The laughter and applause--“Mr. Caister’s rendering left
nothing to be desired; its ---- and its ---- are in the true spirit of
----!”

Silence recalled him from his rings of smoke. Bryce-Green was sitting,
with cigar held out and mouth a little open, and bright eyes round as
pebbles, fixed--fixed on some object near the floor, past the corner
of the tablecloth. Had he burnt his mouth? The eyelids fluttered; he
looked at Caister, licked his lips like a dog, nervously, and said:

“I say, old chap, don’t think me a beast, but are you at
all--er--er--rocky? I mean--if I can be of any service, don’t hesitate!
Old acquaintance, don’t you know, and all that----”

His eyes rolled out again towards the object, and Caister followed
them. Out there above the carpet he saw it--his own boot. It dangled,
because his knees were crossed, six inches off the ground--split--right
across, twice, between lace and toecap. Quite! He knew it. A boot left
him from the rôle of Bertie Carstairs, in ‘The Dupe,’ just before the
war. Good boots. His only pair, except the boots of Dr. Dominick, which
he was nursing. And from the boot he looked back at Bryce-Green, sleek
and concerned. A drop, black when it left his heart, suffused his eye
behind the monocle; his smile curled bitterly; he said:

“Not at all, thanks! Why?”

“Oh! n-n-nothing. It just occurred to me.” His eyes--but Caister had
withdrawn the boot. Bryce-Green paid the bill and rose.

“Old chap, if you’ll excuse me; engagement at half-past two. So awf’ly
glad to have seen you. Good-bye!”

“Good-bye!” said Caister. “And thanks!”

He was alone. And, chin on hand, he stared through his monocle into an
empty coffee cup. Alone with his heart, his boot, his life to come....
‘And what have you been in lately, Mr. Caister?’ ‘Nothing very much
lately. Of course I’ve played almost everything.’ ‘Quite so. Perhaps
you’ll leave your address; can’t say anything definite, I’m afraid.’
‘I--I should--er--be willing to rehearse on approval; or--if I could
read the part?’ ‘Thank you, afraid we haven’t got as far as that.’ ‘No?
Quite! Well, I shall hear from you, perhaps.’ And Caister could see his
own eyes looking at the manager. God! What a look.... A topping life!
A dog’s life! Cadging--cadging--cadging for work! A life of draughty
waiting, of concealed beggary, of terrible depressions, of want of food!

The waiter came skating round as if he desired to clear. Must go! Two
young women had come in and were sitting at the other table between him
and the door. He saw them look at him, and his sharpened senses caught
the whisper:

“Sure--in the last act. Don’t you see his _mêche blanche_?”

“Oh! yes--of course! Isn’t it--wasn’t he----!”

Caister straightened his back; his smile crept out, he fixed his
monocle. They had spotted his Dr. Dominick!

“If you’ve quite finished, sir, may I clear?”

“Certainly. I’m going.” He gathered himself and rose. The young women
were gazing up. Elegant, with faint smile, he passed them close,
managing--so that they could not see--his broken boot.

1922.




STROKE OF LIGHTNING


This was before the war, and conditions were such that the tragedies
and comedies of private lives seemed still to have importance.

I had not seen my friend Frank Weymouth for some years before coming
across him and his wife that Christmas at the big hotel in Heliopolis.
He was always a sunny fellow with a spilt-wine look about him, which
not even a house-mastership at a Public School had been able to
overcome; his wife, whom I had only met twice before, surprised me a
little. I remembered a quiet, rather dark little person with a doubting
eye; but this was a very kitten of a woman, brimful of mischief and
chaff, and always on the go--reaction, no doubt, from the enforced
decorum of a house where she was foster-mother of forty boys, in
an atmosphere of being under glass and the scrutiny of intensive
propriety. In our Egyptian hotel, with its soft, clever Berberine
servants, its huge hall, palm-garden, and cosmopolitan guests, its
golf-course with little dark, scurrying Arab caddies and the desert at
its doors, Jessie Weymouth frolicked and rolled her large dark eyes,
scratched and caressed us with her little paws. Life had suddenly got
into her, and left its tail outside for her to chase. She dragged us
all along in her gay pursuit of it; Weymouth smilingly acquiesced in
her outrageous ‘goings-on.’ He knew, I suppose, that she was devoted to
him, and her bark no bite. His ‘term’ had been a hard one; he was in
a mood of lying back, physically run down, mentally flattened out. To
soak in idleness and the sun was all he seemed to care about.

I forget who first conceived the notion of our desert trip, but it
was Jessie Weymouth who fostered it. The Weymouths were not rich, and
a desert trip costs money. They, myself, and a certain Breconridge
couple had agreed to combine, when the Breconridges were suddenly
summoned home by their daughter’s illness. Jessie Weymouth danced with
disappointment. “I shall die if we don’t go now,” she cried. “We simply
must scare up somebody.”

We scared up the Radolins, an Austrian couple in our hotel whom we
had been meeting casually after dinner. He was a Count, in a bank at
Constantinople, and she, I think, the daughter of a Viennese painter.
They used to interest me from being so very much the antithesis of
the Weymouths. He was making the most of his holiday, dancing, playing
golf, riding; while she seemed extraordinarily listless, pale, and,
as it were, dragged along by her lively husband. I would notice her
lounging alone in the gorgeous hall, gazing apparently at nothing. I
could not make up my mind about her looks. Her figure was admirable,
so were her eyes--ice-green with dark lashes. But that air of tired
indifference seemed to spoil her face. I remember doubting whether it
were not going to spoil our trip. But Jessie Weymouth could not be
denied, and Radolin, we all admitted, was good company.

We started, then, from Mena House, like all desert excursionists, on
New Year’s Day. We had only a fortnight before us, for the Weymouths
were due back in England on the twentieth.

Our dragoman was a merry scoundrel by disposition and an Algerian
Bedouin by race. Besides him we had twelve Arabs, a Greek cook, seven
camels, four donkeys, and five tents. We took the usual route for the
Fayoum. I remember our start so well. In front, Jessie Weymouth on a
silver-grey donkey, and our scoundrel on his pet camel. Then Radolin,
Weymouth, and I on the other three donkeys, and Hélène Radolin perched
up, remote and swaying, on the other riding-camel. The pack-camels had
gone on ahead. All day we dawdled along, following the river towards
Samara, where we camped at a due distance from that evil-smelling
village. I had the middle tent, Weymouths to my right, Radolins to
my left. Everything was well done by our merry dragoman, and dinner,
thanks to him, Jessie Weymouth, and Radolin, a lively feast. Still,
these first three days, skirting cultivation, were disappointing. But
on the fourth we were well out on the lonely sands, and the desert air
had begun to go to our heads. That night we camped among bare hills
under a wonderful starry sky, cold and clear as crystal. Our scoundrel
surpassed himself at dinner; Jessie Weymouth and Radolin were madcaps;
Weymouth his old sunny self. Only Hélène Radolin preserved her languor;
not offensively, but as though she had lost the habit of gaiety. That
night I made up my mind, however, that she really was a beautiful
woman. The long days in the sun had given her colour, taken the tired
look out of her face, and at least twice during the evening I caught
Weymouth’s eyes fixed on her as if he, too, had made that discovery.

The pranks of Jessie Weymouth and Radolin reached their limit at
dinner, and they finished by rushing out into the night to the top of
a neighbouring hillock.

Sitting in my tent doorway, counting the stars, I was joined by our
dragoman. The fellow had been in England and knew about Western freedom
and the manners of our women.

“She certainly is a good one, Mrs. Weymut,” he said to me. “Mr. Weymut
a very quiet man. I think he will be tired of her flirts, but he never
say nothing--too b----y gentle. The Count he is a good one too, but the
Countess--ah! she made of ice! We get some fresh fruit to-morrow at the
Fayoum.”

He went on to his men, two hundred yards away among the camels.

It was wonderfully silent. The light from stars and a half-moon
powdered the sands; no wind at all, yet deliciously cold--the desert in
good mood; no influence quite so thrilling to pulses, yet so cooling to
fevers; no sound, no movement in all the night.

“Isn’t it heavenly? Good-night.”

Hélène Radolin was passing me in her fur. She went into her tent. I sat
on, smoking. And presently, outside the dining-tent, I saw Weymouth,
his head thrown back, drawing in deep breaths. By the light of the
lantern over the tent door he had a look as if inspired by a curious
happy wonder. Then he, too, went to his tent. Ten minutes later the
madcaps returned, Mrs. Weymouth in front, very quiet; her face, indeed,
wore a rather mortified expression, as if she had fallen a little in
her own estimation. They went into their tents, and I heard voices a
moment to left and right; then the stillness and the powdering light
enveloped all.

Next day, bored with donkey riding, I walked with the Arabs and saw
little of my companions. Weymouth and the Countess, I think, were on
the two riding-camels, Radolin and Mrs. Weymouth on their donkeys. We
came to the edge of the Fayoum about five o’clock. That camping-ground
was narrow. In tents, when jammed together, one can’t avoid hearing
at least the tone of neighbouring talk, and I was struck by a certain
acrimony in the Weymouth tent. Jessie Weymouth seemed complaining that
Frank hadn’t spoken to her all day.

“I suppose,” she said, “you didn’t like my running out with Countie
last night?”

Weymouth’s voice, quite good-humoured, answered:

“Oh, not a bit, why should I mind?”

By the ensuing silence I seemed to realise that Jessie Weymouth
was disappointed. Perhaps I hadn’t really a feeling of suspense
that evening, but, in reminiscence, it seems to me I had. Dinner
was certainly a disharmonic feast: little Mrs. Weymouth audacious
and rueful, Weymouth and the Countess subdued, Radolin artificial,
our scoundrel and myself had to make the running. That fellow was
needle-sharp, though not always correct in his conclusions.

“Mrs. Weymut got a fly in her little eye,” he said to me as I was
turning in. “I make it all right to-morrow. I get a dancer at
Sennourès. Oho, she is a good one! She make the married couples ’appy.
We get some fresh eggs too.”

Severe silence in the tents to right and left that night.

A whole day’s travelling through the crops of the Fayoum brought
us to the camping-ground outside Sennourès, among a grove of
palm-trees--charming spot, but lacking the clear, cold spirituality of
the desert night.

The dancer was certainly ‘a good one.’ What a baggage! All lithe,
supple enticement, and jangle of shivering beads! The excitement of the
Arabs, the shocked, goggling eyes of Jessie Weymouth--quite a little
Puritan when it came to the point--the laughter of our scoundrel,
Hélène Radolin’s aloofness, which kept even that daughter of Egypt in
her place, were what impressed me during the performance.

Towards the end the Egyptian made a dead set at Weymouth, and, getting
nothing out of him except his smile, became quite cross. Leaning down
to our scoundrel and slinking her eyes round at the Countess, she
murmured something malicious. Our laughing scoundrel patted her, and
we broke up. In ten minutes our camp was empty--dancer, Arabs, all had
gone off to the village. I went out and stood in darkness among the
palm-trees, listening to the shivering of their leaves.

In the dining-tent Radolin was playing the guitar--a soothing sound
after the vibrant Arab music. Presently I saw Weymouth come out. He
stood under the lamp at the entrance, looking back; his face was fully
lighted for me, but invisible, I think, to those within. I can still
see the look on it. Adoration incarnate!

‘Hallo!’ I thought, ‘what’s this?’ And just then Hélène Radolin came
out too. She passed him quietly; he did not attempt to speak or
follow; but she saw. Oh, yes, she saw; then vanished into her tent.
And Weymouth stood, rooted, as if struck by lightning, while, on and
on, behind him rose the thrum of that guitar and all around us the
shivering of the palm-leaves in a gusty breeze.

Quite the custom, I believe, in these days to laugh at this sort of
thing--at such sudden leaps of an irresponsible force; to suggest that
they are old-fashioned, overrated--literary, in fact. The equality of
the sexes--they say--the tendency of women towards brains and trousers,
have diminished Venus; and yet, I fancy what happened to my friend
Weymouth may still happen to young gentlemen who talk as if love had no
fevers and no proprietary instincts; as if, when you burn for a woman,
you are willing to leave her to another, or share her with him without
fuss. Of course there are men who have no blood in their veins; but
my friend Weymouth unfortunately had--not for nothing was the sunny,
spilt-wine look about his hair and cheeks and dark-blue eyes.

For the rest of our desert trip the situation hopelessly promoted that
adoration. Little Jessie Weymouth certainly did her best to help. She
was the only one of us blind to what had happened. Her perceptions, you
see, were blunted by the life of strenuous duty which she and Weymouth
led in term time, and by the customary exhaustion of her husband
during the holidays. She could not imagine him otherwise than sober.
But now--if ever a man were drunk! The thing became so patent that it
was quite painful to see her continued blindness. Not till sunset of
the second day, with the Fayoum behind us, in our high camp on the
desert’s edge, did she appreciate tragedy. _Those two_ were sitting
in camp-chairs close together, watching the sun go down. The Arabs,
presented with a ram to soothe their grief at abandoning the joys of
the Fayoum, were noisily preparing the animal to the idea of being
eaten. Our scoundrel and Radolin were absent; I was sketching; Jessie
Weymouth lying down in her tent. Those two were alone--their faces
turned towards each other, their hands, perhaps, touching. A strange
violet was in the light over the bare hills; how much they saw of it I
know not, nor what they were saying to each other, when Jessie Weymouth
came out of her tent, stretching and yawning, and, like the kitten
she was, went stealing up behind, to startle them. Three yards away,
unseen, unheard, I saw her stop. Her lips opened, her eyes went wide
with amazement. Suddenly she covered them with her hands, turned round,
and stole back into her tent.

Five minutes later out she came again, with bright, hard spots of
colour in her cheeks. I saw her run up to them, her feverish attempts
at gaiety; and I saw, too, that to them she simply did not exist. We
none of us existed for them. They had found a world of their own, and
we were shadows in the unreal world which they had left. You know the
pink-flowered daphne, the scent of whose blossoms is very sweet, heavy,
and slightly poisonous; sniff it too much and a kind of feverish fire
will seize you. Those two had sniffed the daphne!

Walls have a singular value for civilised beings. In my thin tent
between the thin tents of those two couples, prevented by lack of walls
from any outlet to their feelings, I seemed to hear the smothered
reproaches, the smothered longings. It was the silence of those two
suddenly stricken lovers that was so impressive. I, literally, did not
dare to speak to Weymouth while we were all mixed up like that. This
English schoolmaster had lost, as if by magic, all power of seeing
himself as others saw him. Not that those two ‘carried on’--nothing
so normal; they just seemed to have stepped into quiet oblivion of
everything but each other.

Even our scoundrel was puzzled. “In my house, when my wife behave bad,
I beat her,” he said to me; “when I behave bad she scratch my face.”
But there it was--we had no walls; Hélène Radolin could not be beaten,
Weymouth could not have his face scratched--most awkward.

Things come to an end, and I never breathed more freely than when Mena
House delivered us from that frightful close companionship.

As if by common consent, we dined at separate tables. After dinner I
said to Weymouth:

“Come up and see the Sphinx by moonlight.”

He came, still in his dream. We reached the Sphinx in silence, and sat
down over against her on the sand. At last I said:

“What are you going to do now, old man?”

“I can’t leave her.” It was as if we had discussed the thing a dozen
times already.

“But you have to be back on the twentieth?”

“I know.”

“My dear fellow, it’s ruination. And Jessie?”

“She must do what she likes.”

“This is madness, Frank!”

“Perhaps. I can’t go; that’s all.”

“What about _her_?”

“I don’t know. I only know that where she goes I must.”

I just sat staring at the blunt shadow of the Sphinx’s broken profile
on the moonlit sand. The strange, actionless, desert love-dream was at
an end! Something definite--horrible, perhaps--must happen now! And I
stammered out:

“For God’s sake, old boy, think of your wife, your work, yourself--be
reasonable! It isn’t worth it, really!”

“Perhaps not. This has nothing to do with reason.”

From a master at an English Public School the remark appeared to me
fantastic. And, suddenly, he got up, as if he had been bitten. He
was realising suddenly the difference that walls make. His face had
a tortured look. The woman he loved, walled up with the man she had
married! Behind us the desert, hundreds of miles of clean, savage
sand, and in it we humans--tame and spiritual! Before us walls, and we
humans--savage, carnal again! Queer! I doubt if he saw the irony; but
he left me sitting there and went hurrying back to the hotel.

I stayed on a little with the riddle of the Ages, feeling it simple
compared with this riddle of the moment. Then I followed him down.
Would it resolve itself in terms of l. s. d.? After all, these four
people had to live--could they afford to play fast and loose with the
realities? Hélène Radolin had no money; Weymouth his mastership and a
few hundreds saved; Jessie Weymouth a retired Colonel for a father;
Radolin his banking partnership.

A night of walls had its effect. Radolin took his wife back to
Heliopolis next day. The Weymouths remained at Mena House; in three
days they were due to sail.

I well remember thinking: ‘There, you see, it doesn’t do to exaggerate.
This was a desert mirage and will pass like one. People are not
struck by lightning!’ But in a mood of morbid curiosity I went out to
Heliopolis.

In the tramcar on the way I felt a sort of disappointment--Hélène
Radolin was a Roman Catholic, Frank Weymouth an English gentleman. The
two facts put a stopper on what I wanted stopped. Yet we all have a
sneaking love for the romantic, or--shall we say?--dramatic.

Well! The Radolins were gone. They had started that morning for
Constantinople. In the Oriental hall where all this had begun I sat,
browsing over my Turkish coffee, seeing again my friend Weymouth,
languid and inert; his little wife’s flirtatious liveliness; Radolin so
debonair; Hélène Radolin, silent, her ice-green eyes slightly reddened
in the lids as if she had been crying. The white-garbed Berberines
slipped by; Greek gentlemen entertained their dubious ladies; Germans
raised a guttural racket; the orchestra twanged out the latest tango.
Nothing was changed but those figures of my vision. And suddenly
Weymouth materialised--standing as if lost, just where the lobby opened
into the hall. From his face it was clear to me that he knew the
Radolins were gone; before I could join him he went out hastily. I am
sorry now that I did not follow.

That evening at Mena House I was just beginning to undress when Jessie
Weymouth tapped on my door.

“Have you seen Frank?”

I told her where I had seen him in the afternoon.

“That woman!” she cried. “He’s not come back.”

I assured her that the Radolins were gone back home. She stared at me
and began to cry. She cried and cried, and I did not try to stop her.
She was not only desolate and miserable, but bitter and angry. ‘So long
as she can be angry,’ I thought, ‘she’ll get over it. One is not angry
under a death-blow.’

At last she had cried her misery out, but not her anger or dismay. What
was she to do? I tried to persuade her that Frank would turn up in time
for them to start to-morrow evening. He was probably trying to work
the thing out of his system; she must look on it as a fever, a kind of
illness. She laughed wildly, scornfully, and went out.

Weymouth did not turn up, but the morning brought me a letter,
enclosing a cheque for three hundred pounds, a note to his wife, and a
sealed envelope addressed to the headmaster of his Public School.

The letter to me ran as follows:


     “OLD MAN,

     “I admit that I am behaving like a cad; but it’s either this or
     the sweet waters of oblivion; and there’s less scandal this way. I
     have made up some story for my chief; please post it. The cheque
     is for all my substance except some fifty pounds. Take care of it
     for my wife; she’ll get another five hundred, about, out of the
     turnover of our house. She will go to her father, no doubt, and
     forget me, I hope. Do, please, like a good fellow, see her safely
     on board. It’s not likely that I shall ever come back to England.
     The future is quite dark, but where _she_ is, there I must be.
     Poste restante Constantinople will find me, so far as I know at
     present. Good-bye!

     “Your affectionate
     “F. W.”


I did see Jessie Weymouth on board her ship, and a precious business it
was.

A week later I, too, started for Constantinople, partly because I had
promised Mrs. Weymouth, partly because I could not reconcile myself
to the vision of my friend in the grip of his passion, without a job,
almost without money.

The Radolins inhabited an old house on the far shore almost opposite
the Rumeli Hissar. I called on them without warning, and found Hélène
Radolin alone. In a room all Turkish stuffs and shadowy lights, she
looked very different from her desert self. She had regained her pale
languor, but her face had a definite spirit, lacking when I first saw
her. She spoke quite freely.

“I love him; but it is madness. I have tried to send him away; he will
not go. You see, I am a Catholic; my religion means much to me. I must
not go away with him. Take him back to England with you; I cannot bear
to see him ruin his life like this for me.”

I confess to looking at her with the wonder whether it was religion or
the lack of l. s. d.

“Ah!” she said. “You don’t understand; you think I am afraid of poverty
with him. No! I am afraid of losing my soul, and his.”

The way she said that was extraordinarily impressive. I asked her if
she saw him.

“Yes; he comes. I have to let him. I cannot bear the look on his face
when I say ‘No.’” She gave me his address.

He had a garret in a little Greek hotel, just above Galata--a
ramshackle place, chosen for its cheapness. He did not seem surprised
to see me. But I was startled. His face, shrunken and lined, had a
bitter, burnt-up look, which deepened the set and colour of his eyes
till they looked almost black. A long bout of disease will produce just
that effect.

“If she didn’t love me,” he said, “I could bear it. But she does. Well!
So long as I can see her I shall stand it; and she’ll come--she’ll come
to me at last.”

I repeated her words to me; I spoke of his wife, of England--no memory,
no allusion, no appeal touched him.

I stayed a month and saw him nearly every day; I did not move him by
one jot. At the end of that month I should never have known him for
the Frank Weymouth who had started out with us from Mena House on
New Year’s Day. Changed! He was! I had managed to get him a teaching
job through a man I knew at the Embassy--a poor enough job--a bare
subsistence. And, watching my friend day by day, I began to have a
feeling of hatred for that woman. Yet I knew that her refusal to
indulge their passion was truly religious. She really did see her lost
soul and his, whirling entwined through purgatory, like the souls of
Paola and Francesca in Watts’ picture. Call it superstition, or what
you will, her scruples were entirely genuine, and, from a certain point
of view, quite laudable.

As for Radolin, he took it all precisely as if there were nothing to
take; smooth and debonair as ever--a little harder about the mouth and
eyes, and that was all.

The morning before I went home I made my way once more up the
evil-smelling stairs to my friend’s garret. He was standing at the
window, looking down over the bridge--that tragic bridge of Galata
where the blind and halt used to trade, perhaps still trade, the sight
of their misfortunes. We stood there side by side.

“Frank,” I said, “this can’t go on! Do you ever look at yourself in the
glass?”

No smile can be so bitter as a smile that used to be sunny.

“So long as I can see her I shall last out.”

“You surely don’t want a woman to feel she’s lost her soul, and is
making you lose yours? She’s perfectly sincere in that.”

“I know. I’ve given up asking. So long as I can see her, that’s all.”

It was mania!

That afternoon I took a boat over to the Radolins. It was April--the
first real day of spring, balmy and warm. The Judas-trees of the Rumeli
Hissar were budding, the sun colouring the water with tints of opal;
and all the strange city of mosques and minarets, Western commerce and
Oriental beggary, was wonderfully living under that first spring sun.
I brought my boat up to the Radolins’ landing-stage, and got out. I
mounted the steps, greened over by the wash of the water, and entered
their little garden courtyard. I had never come this way before, and
stood for a moment looking through the mimosas and bougainvillæas for
a door that would satisfy formality. There was a grille to the left,
but to reach it I would have to pass in front of the wide ground-floor
window, whence I had sometimes looked out over the water to the Rumeli
Hissar. My shoes made no noise on the marble path, but what I saw in
the room stopped me from trying to pass.

Hélène Radolin was sitting perfectly still in a low chair sideways to
the window, her hands on her lap, her eyes fixed on the tiled floor,
where a streak of sunlight fell. In the curve of her grand piano,
resting his elbows on it, Weymouth was leaning back, equally still,
gazing down at her. That was all. But the impression I received of life
arrested, of frozen lava, was in a way terrible. I stole back down the
steps into my boat, and out on to the opal-tinted waters.

I have nothing more to tell you of this business. The war came down on
us all soon after. Rumours I have heard, but I know nothing, as they
say, of my own knowledge. Yet it has seemed to me worth while to set
down this record of a ‘stroke of lightning’ in days when people laugh
at such absurdities.

1921.




VIRTUE


Harold Mellesh, minor clerk in an accident assurance society, having
occasion to be present at a certain police court to give evidence in
the matter of a smashed car, stood riveted by manifestations of the
law entirely new to him. His eyes, blue and rather like those of a
baby, were opened very widely, his ingenuous forehead wrinkled, his
curly hair was moving on his scalp, his fists involuntarily clenching
his straw hat. He had seen four ladies of the town dealt with--three
‘jugged,’ and one fined--before his sensations reached their climax.
Perhaps she was prettier than the others, certainly younger, and she
was crying.

“First time you’ve been here--two pounds, and ten shillings costs.”

“But I haven’t any money, sir.”

“Very well--fourteen days.”

Tears streaking the remains of powder; a queer little sound--the
sensations within young Mellesh simmered like a kettle coming to the
boil. He touched a dark blue sleeve in front of him.

“Here,” he said, “I’ll pay her fine.”

He felt the glance of the policeman running over him like a chilly
insect.

“Friend of yours?”

“No.”

“I shouldn’t, then. She’ll be here again within the month.”

The girl was passing, he saw the swallowing movement of her throat and
said with desperation:

“I don’t care. I’ll pay it.”

The blue man’s glance crept about him clammily.

“Come with me, then.”

Young Mellesh followed him out.

“Here,” said his policeman to the one in charge of the girl, “this
gentleman’ll pay the fine.”

Conscious of a confusion of glances, of his own cheeks reddening
furiously, young Mellesh brought out his money--just two pounds
fifteen; and, handing over the two pounds ten, he thought, ‘My hat!
What would Alice say?’

He heard the girl’s gasped out “Ow! Thank you!” his policeman’s
muttered “Waste o’ money!” and passed out into the street. Now that
his feelings had given off that two pound ten’s worth of steam he felt
chilly and dazed, as if virtue had gone out of him. A voice behind him
said:

“Thank you ever so much--it _was_ kind of you.”

Raising his straw hat he stood uncomfortably, to let her pass.

She pushed a card into his hand. “Any time you’re passing, I’ll be glad
to see you; I’m very grateful.”

“Not at all!” With a smile, confused like her own, he turned off
towards his office.

All day, among his accidents, he felt uncertain. Had he been a fool;
had he been a hero? Sometimes he thought: ‘What brutes they are
to those girls!’ and sometimes: ‘Don’t know; suppose they must do
something about it.’ And he avoided considering how to explain the
absence of two pounds ten shillings on which Alice had been reckoning.
His soul was simple like the expressions on his face.

He reached home at the usual hour--six-thirty. His home was grey and
small and had a little bit of green up Chalk Farm way, where the Tube
made all things possible.

His wife, who had just put their baby daughter to bed, was sitting in
the parlour darning his socks. She looked up--surely her forehead was
rather like a knee!

“You wear your socks properly, Harold,” she said; “it’s all I can
do to mend this pair.” Her eyes were china-blue, round like saucers;
her voice had the monotony of one brought up to minimise emotion. A
farmer’s daughter, young Mellesh had become engaged to her during a
holiday in Somerset. Pale himself, from office and the heat, he thought
how pale she looked.

“The heat’s dreadful, isn’t it?” she said. “Sometimes I wish we’d never
had baby. It does tie you in the evenings. I _am_ looking forward to
Whitsuntide, that I am.”

Young Mellesh, tall and straggly, bent over and kissed her forehead.
How on earth to let her know that he had ‘blewed’ their holiday? He was
realising that he had done an awful thing. Perhaps--oh! surely--she
would understand how he couldn’t sit and see that girl ‘jugged’ before
his eyes for want of it! But not until the end of their small supper
did he say abruptly:

“I got quite upset this morning, Alice. Had to go down to the police
court about that car smash I told you of, and afterwards I saw them run
in a lot of those Piccadilly girls. It fair sickened me to see the way
they treat them.”

His wife looked up; her face was childlike.

“Why, what do they do to them?”

“Quod them for speakin’ to men in the street.”

“I s’pose they’re up to no good.”

Irritated by the matter-of-factness in her voice, he went on:

“They speak to ’em as if they were dirt.”

“Well, aren’t they?”

“They may be a loose lot, but so are the men.”

“Men wouldn’t be so loose if they weren’t there.”

“I suppose it’s what you call a vicious circle;” and, pleased with his
play on words, he added: “One or two of them were pretty.”

His wife smiled; her smile had a natural teasing quality.

“They treat _them_ better, I suppose?”

That was jolly cynical! and he blurted out:

“One, quite young, never there before, they gave her a fortnight just
because she hadn’t any money--I couldn’t stick it; I paid her fine.”

There was sweat on his forehead. His wife’s face had gone quite pink.

“You paid? How much?”

He was on the point of saying: ‘Ten shillings.’ But something in his
soul revolted. “Regular pill--two pound ten;” and he thought glumly:
‘Oh! what a fool I’ve been!’

He did wish Alice wouldn’t open her mouth like that, when nothing was
coming out--made her look so silly! Her face puckered suddenly, then
became quite blank; he was moved as if he had hit or pinched her.

“Awfully sorry, Alice,” he muttered, “never meant to--she--she cried.”

“Course she cried! You fool, Harold!”

He got up, very much disturbed.

“Well, and what would _you_ have done?”

“Me? Let her stew in her own juice, of course. It wasn’t your affair.”

She too had risen. He thrust his fingers through his hair. The girl’s
face, tear-streaked, confusedly pretty, had come up before him, her
soft common grateful voice tickled his ears again. His wife turned her
back. So! he was in for a fit of sulks. Well! No doubt he had deserved
it.

“I dare say I _was_ a fool,” he muttered, “but I did think you’d
understand how I felt when I saw her cry. Suppose it had been you!”
From the toss of her head, he knew he had said something pretty fatal.

“Oh! So that’s what you think of me!”

He grasped her shoulder.

“Of course I don’t, Alice; don’t be so silly!”

She shook off his hand.

“Whose money was it? Now baby and me’ll get no holiday. And all because
you see a slut crying.”

Before he could answer she was gone. He had an awful sense of having
outraged justice. Given away her holiday--given his wife’s holiday to
a girl of the streets! Still, it was his own holiday, too; besides,
he earned the money! He’d never wanted to give it to the girl; hadn’t
got anything for it! Suppose he’d put it into the offertory bag, would
Alice have been in such a temper even if it was their holiday? He
didn’t see much difference. He sat down with knees apart, and elbows
planted on them, staring at the peonies on the Brussels carpet paid
for on the hire system. And all those feelings that rise in people
living together, when they don’t agree, swirled in his curly head, and
troubled his candid eyes. If only the girl hadn’t cried! She hadn’t
meant to cry; he could tell that by the sound of it. And who was the
magistrate--he didn’t look too like a saint; who was any man to treat
her like that? Alice oughtn’t--No! But suddenly, he saw Alice again
bending over his socks--pale and tired with the heat--doing things
for him or baby--and he had given away her holiday! No denying that!
Compunction flooded him. He must go up and find her and try and make
his peace--he would pawn his bicycle--she should have her holiday--she
should!

He opened the door and listened. The little house was ominously
quiet--only the outside evening sounds from buses passing in the main
road, from children playing on the doorsteps of the side street, from a
man with a barrow of bananas. She must be up in the bedroom with baby!
He mounted the steep whitewashed stairway. It wanted a carpet, and
fresh paint; ah! and a lot of other things Alice wanted--you couldn’t
have everything at once on four pound ten a week--with the price of
living what it was. But she ought to have remembered there were things
he wanted too--yes, precious bad, and never thought of getting. The
door of their bedroom was locked; he rattled the handle. She opened
suddenly, and stood facing him on the little landing.

“I don’t want you up here.”

“Look here, Alice--this is rotten.”

She closed the door behind her.

“It is! You go down again, I don’t want you. Think I believe that about
crying? I’d be ashamed, if I were you!”

Ashamed! He might have been too soft, but why ashamed?

“Think I don’t know what men are like? You can just go to your street
girl, if she’s so pretty!” She stood hard and stiff against the door,
with red spots in her cheeks. She almost made him feel a villain--such
conviction in her body.

“Alice! Good Lord! You must be crazy! I’ve done nothing!”

“But you’d like to. Go along! I don’t want you!”

The stabbing stare of her blue eyes, the muffled energy of her voice,
the bitterness about her mouth all made a fellow feel--well, that he
knew nothing about anything--coming from one’s wife like that! He
leaned back against the wall.

“Well, I’m damned!” was all he could get out.

“D’you mean to say she didn’t ask you?”

The insides of his hands grew wet. The girl’s card in his pocket!

“Well, if you like to be a cat I can’t help it. What d’you take me for?”

“Giving your own child’s money to a dirty slut! You owed it--that’s
what it was--or will be. Go on with you; don’t stand there!”

He had a nasty longing to smite her on the mouth--it looked so bitter.
“Well,” he said slowly, “now I understand.”

Yes, that was it--she was all of a piece with something, with that
police court, with the tone of the men’s voices, with something
unsparing, hard and righteous, which came down sharp on people.

“I thought--I think you might----” he stammered.

“Ugh!” The sound exasperated him so, that he turned to go downstairs.

“You whited sepulchre!”

The door clicked before he could answer the odd insult; he heard the
key turned. Idiotic! The little landing seemed too small to hold his
feelings. Would he ever have been such an ass as to say a word to
Alice, if he _had_ done it? Why! He had never even thought of doing
anything!

Giddy from chagrin he ran downstairs, and, clawing his straw hat from
the rack, went out. The streets were malodorous from London fug--fried
fish, petrol, hot dirty people; he strode along troubled, his eyes
very rueful. So this was what he was really married to--this--this! It
was like being married to that police court! It wasn’t human--no, it
wasn’t--to be so suspicious and virtuous as all that! What was the use
of being decent and straight, if this was all you got for it? Someone
touched him on the shoulder.

“Mister, you’ve been standing against something; you’re all white
behind--let me give you a brush.”

He stood confused, while a stout fair man smote his back up and down
with a large flat hand. Whited sepulchre! A bubble of rage rose to
his lips. All right! She should see! He felt for the girl’s card, and
was suddenly amazed to find that he had no need to look at it--he
remembered the address! Not far off, on the other side of the Euston
Road! That was funny--had he been looking at it without realising? They
said you had a subconscious mind. Well, what about it? No, it was his
conscious mind that was going to serve Alice out! He had reached the
Euston Road. Crossing it, he began to feel a queer pleasurable weakness
in the legs. By this he knew that he was going to do wrong. He was
not going to visit the girl just to serve his wife out, but because
the prospect was----! That was bad--bad; it would put Alice in the
right! He stood still at the corner of a narrow square, with a strip of
garden, and railings round it. He leaned against those railings, his
eyes searching the trees. He had always been quite straight with his
wife--it was she who had put the idea into his head. And yet his legs
being pleasurably weak seemed in an odd way to excuse her. It was like
his doubt whether they hadn’t to do something about it at the police
court. Barring Alice--barring the police court--where would he--would
any man be? Without virtue, entirely without virtue. A pigeon in the
garden cooed. “Any time you’re passing, I’ll be glad to see you.” It
had sounded genuine--really grateful. And the girl had looked--not
worse than anybody else! If Alice had been sympathetic about it he
would never have thought of her again; that is--well----! The doubt
set his legs in motion. He was a married man, and that was all about
it! But he looked across at the numbers on the houses. Twenty-seven!
Yes, there it was! A bloom of lilac brushed his face. The scent jerked
him suddenly back to the farm in Somerset, and he and Alice courting.
Alice--not the Alice on the landing! He scrutinised the shabby house,
and suddenly went hot all over. Suppose he went in there--what would
that girl think? That he had paid her fine because----! But that wasn’t
it at all--oh! no--he wasn’t a squirt like that! He turned his face
away, and walked on fast and far.

The signs were lit above the theatres; traffic was scanty, the streets
a long dawdle of what vehicles and humans were about. He came to
Leicester Square and sat down on a bench. The lights all round him
brightened slowly under the dusk--theatre lights, street lamps. And the
pity of things smote him, sitting there. So much of everything; and
one got so little of anything! Adding figures up all day, going home
to Alice--that was life! Well, it wasn’t so bad when Alice was nice
to him. But--crikey!--what one missed! That book about the South Sea
Islands--places, peoples, sights, sounds, scents, all over the world!
Four pound ten a week, a wife, a baby! Well, you couldn’t have things
both ways--but had he got them either way? Not with the Alice on the
landing!

Ah! Well! Poor Alice; jolly hard on her to miss her holiday! But she
might have given him the chance to tell her that he would pawn his
bicycle. Or was it all a bad dream? Had he ever really been in the
police court, seen them herding those girls to prison--girls who did
what they did because--well, like himself, they had missed too much.
They’d catch a fresh lot to-night. What a fool he’d been to pay that
fine!

‘Glad I didn’t go into that girl’s house, anyway,’ he thought. ‘I would
have felt a scum!’ The only decent thing about it all had been her
look when she said: “Ow! thank you!” That gave him a little feeling of
warmth even now; and then--it, too, chilled away. Nothing for it! When
he had done sitting there, he must go home! If Alice had thought him a
wrong-un before, what would she think when he returned? Well, there it
was! The milk was spilt! But he did wish she hadn’t got such a virtue
on her.

The sky deepened and darkened, the lights stared white; the square
garden with its flower-beds seemed all cut out and stiff--like scenery
on a stage. Must go back and ‘stick’ it! No good to worry!

He got up from the bench, and gave himself a shake. His eyes, turned
towards the lights of the Alhambra, were round, candid, decent, like
the eyes of a baby.

1922.




CONSCIENCE


Taggart sat up. The scoop under the ranger’s fence, cannily selected
for his sleeping place, was overhung by branches, and the birds of Hyde
Park were at matins already. His watch had gone the way of his other
belongings during the last three months, and he could only assume from
the meagre light that it was but little after dawn. He was not grateful
to the birds; he would be hungry long before a breakfast coming from he
hardly knew where. But he listened to them with interest. This was the
first night he had passed in the open, and, like all amateurs, he felt
a kind of triumph at having achieved vagrancy in spite of the law, the
ranger, and the dew. He was a Northumbrian, too, and his ‘tail still
up,’ as he expressed it. Born in a town, Taggart had not much country
lore--at sparrows, blackbirds, thrushes, his knowledge stopped; but he
enjoyed the bobbery the little beggars were kicking up, and, though a
trifle stiff perhaps, he felt ‘fine.’

He lit his pipe, and almost at once his brain began to revolve the
daily problem of how to get a job, and of why he had lost the one he
had.

Walking, three months ago, burly, upright, secure and jolly, into the
room of his chief at the offices of ‘Conglomerated Journals, Ltd.,’ he
had been greeted with:

“Morning, Taggart. Georgie Grebe is to give us an article for the
_Lighthouse_. He won’t be able to write it, of course. Just do me a
column he could sign--something Grebeish. I want a feature of that sort
every week now in the _Lighthouse_; got half a dozen really good names.
We simply must get it on its legs with the big Public.”

Taggart smiled. Georgie Grebe! The name was a household word--tophole
idea to get him!

“Did he ever write a line in his life, sir?”

“Don’t suppose so--but you know the sort of thing he _would_ write;
he gets nothing for it but the Ad. The week after I’ve got Sir Cutman
Kane--you’ll want to be a bit careful there; but you can get his manner
from that book of his on murder trials. He hasn’t got a minute--must
have it devilled; but he’ll sign anything decently done. I’m going to
_make_ ’em buy the _Lighthouse_, Taggart. Get on to the Grebe article
at once, will you.”

Taggart nodded, and, drawing from his pocket some typewritten sheets
of paper, laid them on the bureau.

“Here’s your signed leader, sir; I’ve gingered it a bit too much,
perhaps.”

“Haven’t time to look at it; got to catch a train.”

“Shall I tone it down a little?”

“Better perhaps; use your judgment. Sit here, and do it now. Good-bye;
back on Friday.”

Reaching for his soft hat, assisted into his coat by Taggart, the chief
was gone.

Taggart sat down to pencil the signed leader.

‘Good leader,’ he thought; ‘pity nobody knows I write ’em!’

This devilling was quite an art, and, not unlike art, poorly enough
paid. Still, not bad fun feeling you were the pea and the chief only
the shell--the chief, with his great name and controlling influence. He
finished pencilling, O.K.’d the sheets, thought, ‘Georgie Grebe! what
the deuce shall I write about?’ and went back to his room.

It was not much of a room, and there was not much in it except Jimmy
Counter, smoking a pipe and writing furiously.

Taggart sat down too, lit his own pipe, took a sheet of paper and
scrawled the words ‘Georgie Grebe Article’ across the top.

Georgie Grebe! It _was_ a scoop! The chief had a wonderful flair
for just the names that got the Public. There was something rather
beautifully simple about writing an article for a man who had never
written a line--something virginal in the conception. And when you
came to think of it, something virginal in the Public’s buying of the
article to read the thoughts of their idol, Georgie Grebe. Yes, and
what were their idol’s thoughts? If he, Taggart, didn’t know, nobody
would, not even the idol! Taggart smiled, then felt a little nervous.
Georgie Grebe--celebrated clown--probably he hadn’t any thoughts!
Really, there was something very trustful about the Public! He dipped
his pen in ink and sat staring at the nib. Trustful! The word had
disturbed the transparency of his mental process, as a crystal of
peroxide will disturb and colour a basinful of water. Trustful! The
Public would pay their pennies to read what they thought were the
thoughts of Georgie Grebe. But----! Taggart bit into the pipe stem.
Steady! He was getting on too fast. Of course Georgie Grebe had
thoughts if he signed them--hadn’t he? His name would be reproduced in
autograph, with the indispensable portrait. People would see by his
features that he must have had them. Was the Public so very trustful
then? The evidence was there all right. Fraudulent? This was just
devilling, there was nothing fraudulent about ‘devilling’--everybody
did it. You might as well say those signed leaders written for the
chief were fraudulent. Of course they weren’t--only devilled! The
Public paid for the thoughts of the chief, and there they were since he
signed them. Devilled thoughts! And yet! Would the public pay if those
leaders were signed A. P. Taggart? The thoughts would be the same--and
very good. They ought to pay--but--would they? He struck another match,
and wrote:


     “I am no writer, ladies and gentlemen. I am--believe me--a simple
     clown. In balancing this new pole upon my nose I am conscious of a
     certain sense of fraud----”


He crossed out the paragraph. That word again--must keep it from
buzzing senselessly round his brain like this! He was only devilling;
hold on to ‘devilling’; it was his living to devil--more or less--just
earning his living--getting nothing out of it! Neither was Georgie
Grebe--only the Ad.! Then who was getting something out of it?
‘Conglomerated Journals’! Out of Georgie Grebe’s name; out of the
chief’s name below the devilled leaders--a pretty penny! Well, what
harm in making the most of a big name? Taggart frowned. Suppose a man
went into a shop and bought a box of pills, marked ‘Holloway,’ made
up from a recipe of ‘Tompkins’--did it matter that the man thought
they were Holloway’s, if they were just as good pills, perhaps better?
Taggart laid down his pen and took his pipe out of his mouth. ‘Gosh!’
he thought, ‘never looked at it this way before! I believe it does
matter. A man ought to get the exact article he pays for. If not, any
fraud is possible. New Zealand mutton can be sold as English. Jaeger
stuffs can have cotton in them. This Grebe article’s a fraud.’ He relit
his pipe. With the first puff his English hatred of a moral attitude
or ‘swank’ of any sort beset him. Who was he to take stand against
a custom? Didn’t secretaries write the speeches of Parliamentary
‘big-bugs’? Weren’t the opinions of eminent lawyers often written by
their juniors, read over and signed? Weren’t briefs and pleadings
devilled? Yes; but all that was different. In such cases the Public
weren’t paying for expression, they were paying for knowledge; the big
lawyer put his imprimatur on the knowledge, not on the expression of
it; the Cabinet Minister endorsed his views, whether he had written
them out or not, and it was his views the Public paid for, not the
expression of them. But in this Grebe article the Public would not be
paying for any knowledge it contained, nor for any serious views; it
would pay for a peep into the mind of their idol. ‘And his mind will be
mine!’ thought Taggart; ‘but who’d pay a penny to peep into that?’ He
got up, and sat down again.

With a Public so gullible--what did it matter? They lapped up anything
and asked for more. Yes! But weren’t the gullible the very people who
oughtn’t to be gulled? He rose again, and toured the dishevelled room.
The man at the other table raised his head.

“You seem a bit on your toes.”

Taggart stared down at him.

“I’ve got to write some drivel in the _Lighthouse_ for Georgie Grebe to
sign. It’s just struck me that it’s a fraud on the Public. What do you
say, Jimmy?”

“In a way. What about it?”

“If it is, I don’t want to do it--that’s all.”

His colleague whistled.

“My dear chap, here am I writing a racing article ‘From the Man in the
Paddock’--I haven’t been on a racecourse for years.”

“Oh! well--that’s venial.”

“All’s venial in our game. Shut your eyes, and swallow. You’re only
devilling.”

“Ga!” said Taggart. “Give a thing a decent label, and it is decent.”

“I say, old man, what did you have for breakfast?”

“Look here, Jimmy, I’m inclined to think I’ve struck a snag. It never
occurred to me before.”

“Well, don’t let it occur to you again. Think of old Dumas; I’ve heard
he put his name to sixty volumes in one year. Has that done him any
harm?”

Taggart rumpled his hair, reddish and rather stiff.

“Damn!” he said.

Counter laughed.

“You get a fixed screw for doing what you’re told. Why worry? Papers
must be sold. Georgie Grebe--that’s some stunt.”

“Blast Georgie Grebe!”

He took his hat and went out; a prolonged whistle followed him. All
next day he spent doing other jobs, trying to persuade himself that he
was a crank, and gingerly feeling the mouths of journalists. All he
got was: Fuss about nothing! What was the matter with devilling? With
life at such pressure, what else could you have? But with the best
intentions he could not persuade himself to go on with the thoughts
of Georgie Grebe. And he remembered suddenly that his father had
changed the dogmas of his religion at forty-five, and thereby lost a
cure of souls. He was very unhappy; it was like discovering that he had
inherited tuberculosis. On Friday he was sent for by the chief.

“Morning, Taggart; I’m just back. Look here, this leader for
to-morrow--it’s nothing but a string of statements. Where’s my style?”

Taggart shifted his considerable weight from foot to foot.

“Well, sir,” he said, “I thought perhaps you’d like to put that in
yourself, for a change. The facts are all right.”

The chief stared.

“My good fellow, do you suppose I’ve got time for that? Anybody could
have written this; I can’t sign it as it stands. Tone it up.”

Taggart took the article from the chief’s hand.

“I don’t know that I can,” he said; “I’m----” and stopped.

The chief said kindly:

“Ill?”

Taggart disclaimed.

“Private trouble?”

“No.”

“Well, get on with it, then. How’s the Grebe article turned out?”

“It hasn’t.”

“How do you mean?”

Taggart felt his body stiffening.

“Fact is, I can’t write it.”

“Good gracious, man, any drivel will do, so long as it’s got a flavour
of some sort to carry the name.”

Taggart swallowed.

“That’s it. Is it quite playing the game with the Public, sir?”

The chief seemed to loom larger suddenly.

“I don’t follow you, Taggart.”

Taggart blurted out: “I don’t want to write anyone else’s stuff in
future, unless it’s just news or facts.”

The chief’s face grew very red.

“I pay you to do certain work. If you don’t care to carry out
instructions, we can dispense with your services. What’s the matter
with you, Taggart?”

Taggart replied with a wry smile:

“Suffering from a fit of conscience, sir. Isn’t it a matter of
commercial honesty?”

The chief sat back in his swivel chair and gazed at him for quite
twenty seconds.

“Well,” he said at last in an icy voice, “I have never been so
insulted. Good-morning! You are at liberty.”

Taggart laid down the sheets of paper, walked stiffly to the door, and
turned.

“Awfully sorry, sir, can’t help it.”

The chief bowed distantly, and Taggart went out.

For three months he had enjoyed liberty. Journalism was overstocked;
his name not well known. Too shy and proud to ask for recommendation
from ‘Conglomerated Journals,’ he could never bring himself to explain
why he had ‘got the hoof.’ Claim a higher standard of morality than his
fellows--not he! For two months he had carried on pretty well, but the
last few weeks had brought him low indeed. Yet the more he brooded,
the more he felt that he had been right, and the less inclined he was
to speak of it. Loyalty to the chief he had insulted by taking such
an attitude, dislike of being thought a fool, beyond all, dread of
‘swanking’ kept him silent. When asked why he had left ‘Conglomerated
Journals’ he returned the answer always: “Disagreement on a point
of principle,” and refused to enter into details. But a feeling
had got about that he was a bit of a crank; for, though no one at
‘Conglomerated Journals’ knew exactly why he had vanished, Counter had
spread the news that he had blasted Georgie Grebe, and refused to write
his article. Someone else had done it. Taggart read the production with
irritation. It was jolly bad. Inefficient devilling still hurt one who
had devilled long and efficiently without a qualm. When the article
which had not been written by Sir Cutman Kane appeared--he swore aloud.
It was no more like the one Sir Cutman would have signed if Taggart had
written it than the boots of Taggart were like the boots of the chief,
who seemed to wear a fresh pair every day, with cloth tops. He read the
chief’s new leaders with melancholy, spotting the many deficiencies of
style supplied to the chief by the poor devil who now wrote them. His
square, red, cheerful face had a bitter look while he was reading; and
when he had finished, he would rumple his stiff hair. He was sturdy,
and never got so far as calling himself a fool for his pains; but, week
by week, he felt more certain that his protest had been in vain.

Sitting against the ranger’s palings, listening to the birds, he had a
dreamy feeling about it all. Queer creatures, human beings! So damned
uncritical! Had he not been like that himself for years and years? The
power of a label--that was what struck him, sitting there. Label a
thing decently, and it _was_ decent! Ah! but, ‘Rue by any other name
would smell as sour!’ Conscience!--it was the deuce!

1922.




SALTA PRO NOBIS

(_A Variation_)


“The dancer, my Mother, is very sad. She sits with her head on her
hands. She looks into the emptiness. It is frightful to watch. I have
tried to make her pray, my Mother, but the poor girl does not know
how; she has no belief. She refuses even to confess herself. She is
pagan--but quite pagan. What could one do for her, my Mother--to cheer
her a little during these hours? I have tried to make her tell me of
her life. She does not answer. She sits and looks always into the
emptiness. It does me harm in the heart to see her. Is there nothing
one can do to comfort her a little before she dies? To die so young--so
full of life; for her who has no faith! To be shot--so young, so
beautiful; but it is frightful, my Mother!”

The little elderly Sister raised her hands and crossed them on her
grey-clothed breast. Her eyes, brown and mild, looked up, questioning
the face before her, wax-pale under its coif and smooth grey hair.
Straight, thin, as it were bodiless, beneath her grey and white garb,
the Mother Superior stood pondering. The spy-woman in her charge, a
dancer with gipsy blood they said--or was it Moorish?--who had wormed
secrets from her French naval lover and sold them to the Germans in
Spain. At the trial they said there was no doubt. And they had brought
her to the convent saying: “Keep her for us till the fifteenth. She
will be better with you than in prison.” To be shot--a woman! It made
one shiver! And yet--it was war! It was for France!

And, looking down at the little elderly Sister, the Mother Superior
answered:

“One must see, my daughter. Take me to her cell.”

They went in gently. The dancer was sitting on her bed. There was no
colour in her skin save the saffron sprinkled into it by eastern blood.
The face was oval, the eyebrows slanted a little up; black hair formed
on her forehead a V reversed; her lips, sensuous but fine, showed a
gleam of teeth. Her arms were crossed as though compressing the fire
within her supple body. Her eyes, colour of Malaga wine, looked through
and beyond the whitened walls, through and beyond her visitors, like
the eyes of a caged leopard.

The Mother Superior spoke:

“What can we do for you, my daughter?”

The dancer shrugged.

“You suffer, my daughter. They tell me you do not pray. It is a pity.”

The dancer’s passing smile had the sweetness of something tasted, of a
rich tune, a long kiss; she shook her head.

“One would not say anything to trouble you, my daughter; one feels pity
for your suffering. One comprehends. Is there a book you would read;
some wine you would like; in a word, anything which could distract you
a little?”

The dancer clasped her hands behind her neck. The movement was
beautiful, sinuous--all her body beautiful. A faint colour came into
the Mother Superior’s waxen cheeks.

“Would you wish to dance for us, my daughter?”

On the dancer’s face the smile came again and did not pass.

“Willingly. It will give me pleasure, madame!”

“That is well! Your dresses shall be brought. This evening in the
refectory after the meal. If you wish music--one can place a piano.
Sister Mathilde is a good musician.”

“Music--some simple dances. Madame, could I smoke?”

“Certainly, my daughter. I will have cigarettes brought to you.”

The dancer stretched out her hand. Between her own thin hands the
Mother Superior felt its supple warmth. To-morrow it would be cold and
stiff!

“_Au revoir_! then, my daughter....”

“The dancer will dance for us!” This was the word. One waited,
expectant, as for a miracle. One placed the piano; procured music;
sat eating the evening meal--whispering. The strangeness of it! The
intrusion! The little gay ghosts of memories! Ah! the dramatic, the
marvellous event! Soon the meal was finished; the tables cleared,
removed; against the wall on the long benches sixty grey white-coifed
figures waited--in the centre the Mother Superior, at the piano Sister
Mathilde.

The little elderly Sister came first; then, down the long whitened
refectory, the dancer swaying slowly over the dark-oak floor. Every
head was turned--alone the Mother Superior sat motionless. If only it
did not put notions into some light heads!

The dancer wore a full skirt of black silk, she had silvery shoes and
stockings, round her waist was a broad tight network of gold, over
her bust tight silvery tissue, with black lace draped; her arms were
bare; a red flower was set to one side of her black hair; she held a
black and ivory fan. Her lips were just touched with red, her eyes just
touched with black; her powdered face was like a mask. She stood in
the very centre, with eyes cast down. Sister Mathilde began to play.
The dancer lifted her fan. In that dance of Spain she hardly moved
from where she stood, swaying, shivering, spinning, poised; but her
eyes darted from this face to that of the long row of faces, where so
many feelings were expressed--curiosity and doubt, pleasure, timidity,
horror, sympathy. Sister Mathilde ceased playing. A little murmur broke
along the line of nuns, and the dancer smiled. Sister Mathilde began
again to play. For a moment the dancer listened as if to catch the
rhythm of music strange to her; then her feet moved, her lips parted,
sweet and gay she was, like a butterfly, without a care; and on the
lips of the watching faces smiles came, and little murmurs of pleasure
escaped.

The Mother Superior sat without moving, her lips pressed together,
her fingers interlaced. Images from the past kept starting out, and
falling back, like figures from some curious old musical box. She was
remembering her lover killed in the Franco-Prussian war, her entrance
into religion all that time ago. This figure from the heathen world,
with the red flower in her black hair, the whitened face, the sweetened
eyes, stirred a yearning for her own gay pulses, before they had seemed
to die, and she brought them to the church to bury them.

The music ceased; began again. Now it was a Habañera, awakening
remembrance of those pulses after they were buried--secret, throbbing,
dark. The Mother Superior turned her face to left and right. Had she
been wise? So many light heads, so many young hearts! And yet how
not soothe the last dark hours of this poor heathen girl--the hours
so few! She was happy dancing. Yes, she was happy! What power! And
what abandonment! It was frightening. She was holding every eye--the
eyes even of Sister Louise--holding them as a snake holds a rabbit’s
eyes. The Mother Superior nearly smiled. That poor Sister Louise! And
then, just beyond that face of fascinated horror, she saw young Sister
Marie. How the child stared--what eyes, what lips! Sister Marie--so
young--just twenty--her lover killed in the war--but one year dead!
Sister Marie--prettiest in all the convent! Her hands--how tightly they
seemed pressed together on her lap! And--but, yes--it was at Sister
Marie that the dancer looked; at Sister Marie she was twirling and
writhing those supple limbs! For Sister Marie the strange sweet smile
came and went on those enticing lips. In dance after dance--like a bee
on a favourite flower--to Sister Marie the dancer seemed to cling. And
the Mother Superior thought: ‘Have I done a work of mercy, or--the
Devil’s?’

Close along the line of nuns the dancer swept; her eyes were glowing,
her face proud. On Sister Marie a look alighted, a touch with the fan,
a blown kiss, “_Gracias, Señoras! Adios!_”

And swaying, as she had come, she glided away over the dark floor; and
the little old Sister followed.

A sighing sound rose from the long row of nuns; and--yes--one sob!

“Go to your rooms, my daughters! Sister Marie!”

The young nun came forward; tears were in her eyes.

“Sister Marie, pray that the sins of that poor soul be forgiven. But,
yes, my child, it is sad. Go to your room, and pray!”

With what grace the child walked! She, too, had the limbs of beauty,
and the Mother Superior sighed....

Morning, cold and grey, a sprinkle of snow on the ground. They came for
the dancer during Mass. Later a sound of firing! With trembling lips
the Mother Superior prayed for the soul dancing before her God....

That evening they searched for Sister Marie, and could not find her.
After two days a letter came.


     “Forgive me, my Mother. I have gone back to life.

     “MARIE.”


Life out of death! The Mother Superior sat quite still. Figures from
the past were stealing out again; and the dancer’s face with the red
flower in her hair, the dark sweetened eyes, the lips, touched with a
flying finger, parted in a kiss!

1922.




PHILANTHROPY


Mist enwrapped Restington-on-Sea; not very thick, but exceedingly
clammy. It decked the autumn trees in weirdness, cobwebbed the
tamarisks, and compelled Henry Ivor to shut his window, excluding the
faint hiss and rustle from the beach. He seldom wrote after tea without
the accompaniment of fresh air, and was drowsing over his pen when his
housekeeper entered.

“A couple to see you, sir; they came once before, when you was away.”

Ivor blinked. “Well, show them in.”

When the door was again opened a scent of whisky came in first, then a
man, a woman, and a dog.

Ivor laid down his pen, and rose; he had never seen any of them before,
and immediately doubted whether he wanted to see any of them again.
Never able, however, to be disagreeable at a moment’s notice, he waited
defensively. The man, who might have been thirty-five, pale, warped,
and thin, seemed to extract his face from the grip of nerves.

“Hearing you were down here, sir, and being in the printing trade, if
you understand my meaning----”

Ivor nodded; he did not want to nod, but it seemed unavoidable; and he
looked at the woman. Her face was buttoned, the most expressionless he
had ever seen.

“Well?” he said.

The man’s lips, thin and down at one corner, writhed again.

“You being a well-known writer,” he said, and the scent of whisky
deepened.

Ivor thought: ‘It wants courage to beg; it’s damp too. Perhaps he’s
only primed himself.’

“Well?” he said again.

“If you understand me,” said the man, “I’m in a very delicate position.
I expect you know Mr. Gloy--Charles Gloy--editor of _Cribbage_----”

“No,” said Ivor. “But will you sit down?” And he placed two chairs.

The man and the woman sat down on their edges, the dog, too, sat on its
edge! Ivor regarded it--a Schipperke--thinking:

‘Did they bring their dog to undermine me?’ As to that, it was the only
kind of dog he did not like, but it looked damp and woeful.

“My brother works for Mr. Gloy,” said the man; “so, being at
Beachhampton--out of a job, if you understand my meaning--I brought my
wife--you being a well-known philanthropist----”

Ivor nervously took out a cigarette, and nervously put it back.

“I don’t know what I can do for you,” he murmured.

“I’m one to speak the truth,” resumed the man, “if you follow me----”
And Ivor did--he followed on and on behind a wandering tale of
printing, the war, ill-health. At last he said in despair:

“I really can’t recommend people I know nothing about. What exactly do
you want me to do?”

The woman’s face seemed suddenly to lose a button, as if she were going
to cry, but just then the dog whimpered; she took it up on her lap.
Ivor thought:

‘How much have I got on me?’

“The fact is, Mr. Ivor,” said the man, “I’m broke to the world, if you
understand my meaning. If once I could get back to London----”

“What do you say, madam?”

The woman’s mouth quivered and mumbled; Ivor stopped her with his hand.

“Well,” he said, “I can give you enough to get up to London with, and
a little over. But that’s all, I’m afraid. And, forgive me, I’m very
busy.” He stood up. The man rose also.

“I don’t want to say anything about my wife; you’ll forgive my
mentioning it, but there’s not a lady in England that’s her equal at
makin’ babies’ slippers.”

“Indeed!” said Ivor. “Well, here you are!” And he held out some pound
notes. The man took the notes; one of his trouser-legs was pitiably
patched.

“I’m sure I’m more than grateful----” he said; and looking at Ivor as
if he expected to be contradicted, added: “I can’t say better than
that, can I?”

“No,” said Ivor, and opened the door.

“I’ll be ready to repay you as soon as ever I can--if you understand my
meaning.”

“Yes,” said Ivor. “Good-day! Good-day, Mrs. ----! Good-bye, little dog!”

One by one the three passed him and went out into the mist. Ivor saw
them trailing down the road, shut the outer door, returned to his
chair, sighed profoundly, and took up his pen.

When he had written three pages, and it was getting too dusk to see,
his housekeeper came in.

“There’s a boy from the Black Cow, sir, come to say they want you down
there.”

“Want _me_?”

“Yes, sir. That couple--the boy says they don’t know what to do with
them. They gave your name as being a friend.”

“Good Lord!”

“Yes, sir; and the landlord says they don’t seem to know where they
come from like.”

“Heavens!” said Ivor. He got up, however, put on his overcoat, and went
out.

In the lighted doorway of the Black Cow stood the landlord.

“Sorry to have troubled you, sir, but really I can’t tell how to deal
with these friends of yours.”

Ivor frowned. “I only saw them for the first time this afternoon. I
just gave them money to go up to London with. Are they drunk?”

“Drunk!” said the landlord. “Well, if I’d known the man was half gone
when he came in--of course I’d never---- As to the woman, she sits and
smiles. I can’t get them to budge, and it’s early closin’----”

“Well,” muttered Ivor, “let’s look at them!” And he followed the
landlord in.

On the window-seat in the bar parlour those two were sitting, with mugs
beside them, and the dog asleep on the feet of the woman, whose lips
were unbuttoned in a foolish smile. Ivor looked at the man; his face
was blank and beatific. Specimens of a damp and doleful world, they
now seemed almost blissful.

“Mist’ Ivor?” said the man suddenly.

“Yes,” said Ivor, “but I thought you wanted to go up to London. The
station’s not half a mile.”

“Cert’nly--go up to London.”

“Come along, then; I’ll show you the way.”

“Ve’y good, we can walk, if you understand my meaning.” And the man
stood up, the dog and the woman also. All three passed unsteadily out.

The man walked first, then the woman, then the dog, wavering into the
dusky mist. Ivor followed, praying that they might meet no traffic. The
man’s voice broke the silence in front.

“Hen’y Ivor!” Ivor closed up nervously.

“Hen’y Ivor! I see ’m sayin’ to ’mself: ‘What’ll they move on for!’
I see him, if y’ understand my meaning. Wha’sh he good for--Hen’y
Ivor--only writer o’ books. Is he any better than me--no! Not ’s good,
if you f-follow me. I see ’m thinkin’: ‘How can I get rid of ’m?’” He
stood still suddenly, almost on Ivor’s toes. “Where’s dog--carry th’
dog--get ’is feet wet.”

The woman stooped unsteadily, picked up the dog, and they both wavered
on again. Ivor walked alongside now, grim and apprehensive. The man
seemed to have become aware of him.

“Mist’ Ivor,” he said. “Thought so--I’m not tight--can’t say better
than that, can I?--I’m not writer of books like you--not plutocrat, if
you understand my meaning. Want to ask you question: What would you do
if you was me?”

There was silence, but for the slip-slippering of the woman’s feet
behind.

“I don’ blame you,” said the man, whose speech was getting thicker;
“you can’t help being a plutothrist. But whash the good of anything for
me, except ob-oblivion, if you follow me?”

A faint radiance shone through the mist. The station building loomed
suddenly quite close. Ivor steered towards it.

“Goin’ up t’ London,” said the man. “Qui’ right!”

He lurched past into the lighted entry, and the woman followed with the
dog. Ivor saw them waver through the doorway. And, spinning round, he
ran into the mist. ‘Perfectly true!’ he thought while he was running.
Perfectly true! Why had he helped them? What did he care so long as he
got rid of man, woman, and dog?

1922.




A LONG-AGO AFFAIR


Hubert Marsland, the landscape painter, returning from a day’s
sketching on the river in the summer of 1921, had occasion to stay the
progress of his two-seater about ten miles from London for a minor
repair, and while his car was being seen to, strolled away from the
garage to have a look at a house where he had often spent his holidays
as a boy. Walking through a gateway and passing a large gravel-pit on
his left, he was soon opposite the house, which stood back a little in
its grounds. Very much changed! More pretentious, not so homely as when
his uncle and aunt lived there, and he used to play cricket on this
warren opposite, where the cricket ground, it seemed, had been turned
into a golf course. It was late--the dinner hour, nobody playing, and
passing on to the links he stood digesting the geography. Here must
have been where the old pavilion was. And there--still turfed--where
he had made that particularly nice stroke to leg, when he went in last
and carried his bat for thirteen. Thirty-nine years ago--his sixteenth
birthday. How vividly he remembered his new pads! A. P. Lucas had
played against them and only made thirty-two. One founded one’s style
on A. P. Lucas in those days--feet in front of the bat, and pointed
a little forward, elegant; you never saw it now, and a good thing
too--one could sacrifice too much to style! Still, the tendency was all
the other way; style was too much ‘off,’ perhaps!

He stepped back into the sun and sat down on the grass. Peaceful--very
still! The haze of the distant downs was visible between his uncle’s
old house and the next; and there was the clump of elms on the far
side behind which the sun would be going down just as it used to
then. He pressed the palms of his hands to the turf. A glorious
summer--something like that summer of long ago. And warmth from the
turf, or perhaps from the past, crept into his heart, and made it
ache a little. Just here he must have sat, after his innings, at Mrs.
Monteith’s feet peeping out of a flounced dress. Lord! The fools boys
were! How headlong and uncalculating their devotions! A softness in
voice and eyes, a smile, a touch or two--and they were slaves! Young
fools, but good young fools. And, standing behind her chair--he could
see him now--that other idol, Captain MacKay, with his face of browned
ivory--just the colour of that elephant’s tusk his uncle had, which
had gone so yellow--and his perfect black moustache, his white tie,
check suit, carnation, spats, Malacca cane--all so fascinating! Mrs.
Monteith, ‘the grass widow’ they had called her! He remembered the look
in people’s eyes, the tone in their voices. Such a pretty woman! He
had ‘fallen for her’ at first sight, as the Yanks put it--her special
scent, her daintiness, her voice! And that day on the river, when
she made much of him, and Captain MacKay attended Evelyn Curtiss so
assiduously that he was expected to propose. Quaint period! They used
the word courting then, wore full skirts, high stays; and himself a
blue elastic belt round his white-flannelled waist. And in the evening
afterwards, his aunt had said with an arch smile: “Good-night, _silly_
boy!” Silly boy, indeed, with a flower the grass widow had dropped
pressed by his cheek into his pillow! What folly! And that next
Sunday--looking forward to church--passionately brushing his top hat;
all through the service spying at her creamy profile, two pews in front
on the left, between goat-bearded old Hallgrave, her uncle, and her
pink, broad, white-haired aunt; scheming to get near her when she came
out, lingering, lurking, getting just a smile and the rustle of her
flounces. Ah, ha! A little went a long way then! And the last day of
his holidays and its night with the first introduction to reality. Who
said the Victorian Age was innocent?

Marsland put his palm up to his cheek. No! the dew was not yet falling!
And his mind lightly turned and tossed his memories of women, as a man
turns and tosses hay to air it; but nothing remembered gave him quite
the feeling of that first experience.

His aunt’s dance! His first white waistcoat, bought _ad hoc_, from the
local tailor, his tie laboriously imitating the hero--Captain MacKay’s.
All came back with such freshness in the quiet of the warren--the
expectancy, the humble shy excitement, the breathless asking for a
dance, the writing ‘Mrs. Monteith’ twice on his little gilt-edged
programme with its tiny tasselled white pencil; her slow-moving fan,
her smile. And the first dance when it came; what infinite care not
to tread on her white satin toes; what a thrill when her arm pressed
his in the crush--such holy rapture, about all the first part of
that evening, with yet another dance to come! If only he could have
twirled her and ‘reversed’ like his pattern, Captain MacKay! Then
delirium growing as the second dance came near, making him cut his
partner--the cool grass-scented air out on the dark terrace, with
the chafers booming by, and in the starshine the poplars wondrously
tall, the careful adjustment of his tie and waistcoat, the careful
polishing of his hot face! A long breath then, and into the house
to find her! Ballroom, supper-room, stairs, library, billiard-room,
all drawn blank--‘Estudiantina’ going on and on, and he a wandering,
white-waistcoated young ghost. Ah! The conservatory--and the hurrying
there! And then the moment which had always been, was even now, such
a blurred, confused impression. Smothered voices from between a clump
of flowers: “I saw her.” “Who was the man?” A glimpse, gone past in
a flash, of an ivory face, a black moustache! And then her voice:
“Hubert;” and her hot hand clasping his, drawing him to her; her scent,
her face smiling, very set! A rustling behind the flowers, those people
spying; and suddenly her lips on his cheek, the kiss sounding in his
ears, her voice saying, very softly: “Hubert, dear boy!” The rustle
receded, ceased. What a long, silent minute, then, among the ferns
and blossoms in the dusk with her face close to his, pale, perturbed,
before she led him out into the light, while he was slowly realising
that she had made use of him to shelter her. A boy--not old enough
to be her lover, but old enough to save her name and that of Captain
Mackay! Her kiss--the last of many. Oh, no! not upon _his_ lips, _his_
cheeks! Hard work realising that! A boy--of no account--a boy, who in
a day would be at school again, kissed that _he_ and _she_ might renew
their intrigue unsuspected!

How had he behaved the rest of that evening of romance bedrabbled? He
hardly knew. Betrayed with a kiss! Two idols in the dust! And did they
care what he was feeling? Not they! All they cared for was to cover up
their tracks with him! But somehow--somehow--he had never shown her
that he knew. Only, when their dance was over, and someone came and
took her for the next, he escaped up to his little room, tore off his
gloves, his waistcoat; lay on his bed, thought bitter thoughts. A boy!
There he had stayed, with the thrum of the music in his ears, till at
last it died away for good and the carriages were gone, and the night
was quiet.

Squatting on the warren grass, still warm and dewless, Marsland rubbed
his knees. Nothing like boys for generosity! And, with a little smile,
he thought of his aunt next morning, half-arch and half-concerned: “It
isn’t nice, dear, to sit out in dark corners, and--well, perhaps, it
wasn’t your fault, but still, it isn’t nice--not--quite----” and of
how suddenly she had stopped, looking in his face, where his lips were
curling in his first ironic laugh. She had never forgiven him that
laugh--thinking him a cynical young Lothario? And Marsland thought:
‘Live and learn! Wonder what became of those two? Victorian Age!
Hatches were battened down in those days! But, innocent--my hat!’

Ah! The sun was off, dew falling! He got up, rubbing his knees to take
the stiffness out of them. Pigeons in the wood beyond were calling. A
window in his uncle’s old home blazed like a jewel in the sun’s last
rays between the poplar trees. Heh! dear--a little long-ago affair!

1922.




ACME


In these days no man of genius need starve. The following story of my
friend Bruce may be taken as proof of this assertion. Nearly sixty when
I first knew him, he must have written already some fifteen books,
which had earned him the reputation of ‘a genius’ with the few who
know. He used to live in York Street, Adelphi, where he had two rooms
up the very shaky staircase of a house chiefly remarkable for the fact
that its front door seemed always open. I suppose there never was a
writer more indifferent to what people thought of him. He profoundly
neglected the Press--not with one of those neglects which grow on
writers from reading reviews of their own works--he seemed never to
read criticism, but with the basic neglect of ‘an original,’ a nomadic
spirit, a stranger in modern civilisation, who would leave his attics
for long months of wandering and come back there to hibernate and write
a book. He was a tall, thin man, with a face rather like Mark Twain’s,
black eyebrows which bristled and shot up, a bitten, drooping grey
moustache, and fuzzy grey hair; but his eyes were like owl’s eyes,
piercing, melancholy, dark brown, and gave to his rugged face the
extraordinary expression of a spirit remote from the flesh which had
captured it. He was a bachelor, who seemed to avoid women; perhaps they
had ‘learned’ him that; for he must have been very attractive to them.

The year of which I write had been to my friend Bruce the devil,
monetarily speaking. With his passion for writing that for which his
age had no taste--what could he expect? His last book had been a
complete frost. He had undergone, too, an operation which had cost
him much money and left him very weak. When I went to see him that
October I found him stretched out on two chairs, smoking the Brazilian
cigarettes which he affected--and which always affected me, so black
and strong they were, in their yellow maize-leaf coverings. He had a
writing-pad on his knee, and sheets of paper scattered all around. The
room had a very meagre look. I had not seen him for a year and more,
but he looked up at me as if I’d been in yesterday.

“Hallo!” he said. “I went into a thing they call a cinema last night.
Have you ever been?”

“Ever been? Do you know how long the cinema has been going? Since about
1900.”

“Well! What a _thing_! I’m writing a skit on it!”

“How--a skit?”

“Parody--wildest yarn you ever read.”

He took up a sheet of paper and began chuckling to himself.

“My heroine,” he said, “is an Octoroon. Her eyes swim, and her lovely
bosom heaves. Everybody wants her, and she’s more virtuous than words
can say. The situations she doesn’t succumb to would freeze your blood;
they’d roast your marrow. She has a perfect devil of a brother, with
whom she was brought up, and who knows her deep dark secret and wants
to trade her off to a millionaire who also has a deep dark secret.
Altogether there are four deep dark secrets in my yarn. It’s a corker.”

“What a waste of your time!” I said.

“My time!” he answered fiercely. “What’s the use of my time? Nobody
buys my books.”

“Who’s attending you?”

“Doctors! They take your money, that’s all. I’ve got no money. Don’t
talk about me!” Again he took up a sheet of manuscript; and chuckled.

“Last night--at that place--they had--good God!--a race between a train
and a motor-car. Well, I’ve got one between a train, a motor-car, a
flying machine, and a horse.”

I sat up.

“May I have a look at your skit,” I said, “when you’ve finished it?”

“It _is_ finished. Wrote it straight off. D’you think I could stop and
then go on again with a thing like that?” He gathered the sheets and
held them out to me. “Take the thing--it’s amused me to do it. The
heroine’s secret is that she isn’t an Octoroon at all; she’s a De La
Casse--purest Creole blood of the South; and her villainous brother
isn’t her brother; and the bad millionaire isn’t a millionaire; and her
penniless lover is. It’s rich, I tell you!”

“Thanks,” I said dryly, and took the sheets.

I went away concerned about my friend, his illness and his poverty,
especially his poverty, for I saw no end to it.

After dinner that evening I began languidly to read his skit. I had
not read two pages of the thirty-five before I started up, sat down
again, and feverishly read on. Skit! By George! He had written a
perfect scenario--or, rather, that which wanted the merest professional
touching-up to be perfect. I was excited. It was a little gold-mine
if properly handled. Any good film company, I felt convinced, would
catch at it. Yes! But how to handle it? Bruce was such an unaccountable
creature, such a wild old bird! Imagine his having only just realised
the cinema! If I told him his skit was a serious film, he would say:
“Good God!” and put it in the fire, priceless though it was. And yet,
how could I market it without _carte blanche_, and how get _carte
blanche_ without giving my discovery away? I was deathly keen on
getting some money for him; and this thing, properly worked, might
almost make him independent. I felt as if I had a priceless museum
piece which a single stumble might shatter to fragments. The tone of
his voice when he spoke of the cinema--“What a _thing_!”--kept coming
back to me. He was prickly proud, too--very difficult about money.
Could I work it without telling him anything? I knew he never looked at
a newspaper. But should I be justified in taking advantage of that--in
getting the thing accepted and produced without his knowing? I revolved
the question for hours, and went to see him again next day.

He was reading.

“Hallo! You again? What do you think of this theory--that the Egyptians
derive from a Saharan civilisation?”

“I don’t think,” I said.

“It’s nonsense. This fellow----”

I interrupted him.

“Do you want that skit back, or can I keep it?”

“Skit? What skit?”

“The thing you gave me yesterday.”

“That! Light your fire with it. This fellow----”

“Yes,” I said; “I’ll light a fire with it. I see you’re busy.”

“Oh, no! I’m not,” he said. “I’ve nothing to do. What’s the good of my
writing? I earn less and less with every book that comes out. I’m dying
of poverty.”

“That’s because you won’t consider the Public.”

“How can I consider the Public when I don’t know what they want?”

“Because you won’t take the trouble to find out. If I suggested a way
to you of pleasing the Public and making money you’d kick me out of the
room.”

And the words, “For instance, I’ve got a little gold-mine of yours
in my pocket,” were on the tip of my tongue, but I choked them back.
‘Daren’t risk it!’ I thought. ‘He’s given you the thing. _Carte
blanche--cartes serrés!_’

I took the gold-mine away and promptly rough-shaped it for the film.
It was perfectly easy, without any alteration of the story. Then I was
faced with the temptation to put his name to it. The point was this:
If I took it to a film company as an authorless scenario I should
only get authorless terms; whereas, if I put his name to it, with a
little talking I could double the terms at least. The film public
didn’t know his name, of course, but the inner literary public did, and
it’s wonderful how you can impress the market with the word ‘genius’
judiciously used. It was too dangerous, however; and at last I hit on a
middle course. I would take it to them with no name attached, but tell
them it was by ‘a genius,’ and suggest that they could make capital out
of the incognito. I knew they would feel it _was_ by a genius.

I took it to an excellent company next day with a covering note saying:
“The author, a man of recognised literary genius, for certain reasons
prefers to remain unknown.” They took a fortnight in which to rise, but
they rose. They had to. The thing was too good in itself. For a week
I played them over terms. Twice I delivered an ultimatum--twice they
surrendered: they knew too well what they had got. I could have made
a contract with two thousand pounds down which would have brought at
least another two thousand pounds before the contract term closed; but
I compounded for one that gave me three thousand pounds down as likely
to lead to less difficulty with Bruce. The terms were not a whit too
good for what was really the ‘acme’ of scenarios. If I could have been
quite open I could certainly have done better. Finally, however, I
signed the contract, delivered the manuscript, and received a cheque
for the price. I was elated, and at the same time knew that my troubles
were just beginning. With Bruce’s feeling about the film how the deuce
should I get him to take the money? Could I go to his publishers and
conspire with them to trickle it out to him gradually as if it came
from his books? That meant letting them into the secret; besides, he
was too used to receiving practically nothing from his books; it would
lead him to make enquiry, and the secret was bound to come out. Could
I get a lawyer to spring an inheritance on him? That would mean no end
of lying and elaboration, even if a lawyer would consent. Should I send
him the money in Bank of England notes with the words: ‘From a lifelong
admirer of your genius?’ I was afraid he would suspect a trick, or
stolen notes, and go to the police to trace them. Or should I just go,
put the cheque on the table and tell him the truth?

The question worried me terribly, for I didn’t feel entitled to
consult others who knew him. It was the sort of thing that, if talked
over, would certainly leak out. It was not desirable, however, to
delay cashing a big cheque like that. Besides, they had started on
the production. It happened to be a slack time, with a dearth of good
films, so that they were rushing it on. And in the meantime there was
Bruce--starved of everything he wanted, unable to get away for want of
money, depressed about his health and his future. And yet so completely
had he always seemed to me different, strange, superior to this
civilisation of ours, that the idea of going to him and saying simply:
“This is yours, for the film you wrote,” scared me. I could hear his:
“I? Write for the cinema? What do you mean?”

When I came to think of it, I had surely taken an extravagant liberty
in marketing the thing without consulting him. I felt he would never
forgive that, and my feeling towards him was so affectionate, even
reverential, that I simply hated the idea of being wiped out of his
good books. At last I hit on a way that by introducing my own interest
might break my fall. I cashed the cheque, lodged the money at my bank,
drew my own cheque on it for the full amount, and, armed with that and
the contract, went to see him.

He was lying on two chairs smoking his Brazilians and playing with
a stray cat which had attached itself to him. He seemed rather less
prickly than usual, and, after beating about the bushes of his health
and other matters, I began:

“I’ve got a confession to make, Bruce.”

“Confession!” he said. “What confession?”

“You remember that skit on the film you wrote and gave me about six
weeks ago?”

“No.”

“Yes, you do--about an Octoroon.”

He chuckled. “Oh! ah! That!”

I took a deep breath, and went on:

“Well, I sold it; and the price of course belongs to you.”

“What? Who’d print a thing like that?”

“It isn’t printed. It’s been made into a film--super-film, they call
it.”

His hand came to a pause on the cat’s back, and he glared at me. I
hastened on:

“I ought to have told you what I was doing, but you’re so prickly, and
you’ve got such confounded superior notions. I thought if I did you’d
be biting off your nose to spite your own face. The fact is it made a
marvellous scenario. Here’s the contract, and here’s a cheque on my
bank for the price--three thousand pounds. If you like to treat me as
your agent, you owe me three hundred pounds. I don’t expect it, but I’m
not proud like you, and I shan’t sneeze.”

“Good God!” he said.

“Yes, I know. But it’s all nonsense, Bruce. You can carry scruples to
altogether too great length. Tainted source! Everything’s tainted, if
you come to that. The film’s a quite justified expression of modern
civilisation--a natural outcome of the age. It gives amusement; it
affords pleasure. It may be vulgar, it may be cheap, but we _are_
vulgar, and we _are_ cheap, and it’s no use pretending we’re not--not
you, of course, Bruce, but people at large. A vulgar age wants vulgar
amusement, and if we can give it that amusement we ought to; life’s not
too cheery, anyway.”

The glare in his eyes was almost paralysing me, but I managed to
stammer on:

“You live out of the world--you don’t realise what humdrum people want;
something to balance the greyness, the--the banality of their lives.
They want blood, thrill, sensation of all sorts. You didn’t mean to
give it them, but you have, you’ve done them a benefit, whether you
wish to or not, and the money’s yours and you’ve got to take it.”

The cat suddenly jumped down. I waited for the storm to burst.

“I know,” I dashed on, “that you hate and despise the film----”

Suddenly his voice boomed out:

“Bosh! What are you talking about? Film! I go there every other night.”

It was my turn to say “Good God!” And ramming contract and cheque into
his empty hand, I bolted, closely followed by the cat.

1923.




LATE--299


I


1 §

It was disconcerting to the Governor. The man’s smile was so peculiar.
Of course, these educated prisoners--doctors, solicitors, parsons--one
could never say good-bye to them quite without awkwardness; couldn’t
dismiss them with the usual “Shake hands! Hope you’ll keep straight and
have luck.” No! With the finish of his sentence a gentleman resumed
a kind of equality, ceased to be a number, ceased even being a name
without a prefix, to which the law and the newspapers with their
unfailing sense of what was proper at once reduced a prisoner on, or
even before, his conviction. No. 299 was once more Dr. Philip Raider,
in a suit of dark-grey tweeds, lean and limber, with grey hair grown
again in readiness for the outer world, with deep-set, shining eyes,
and that peculiar smile--a difficult subject. The Governor decided
suddenly to say only: “Well, good-bye, Dr. Raider”; and, holding out
his hand, he found it remain in contact with nothing.

So the fellow was going out in defiant mood--was he! The Governor felt
it rather hard after more than two years; and his mind retraced his
recollections of this prisoner. An illegal operation case! Not a good
‘mixer’--not that his prisoners were allowed to mix; still, always
reassuring to know that they would if not strenuously prevented!
Record--Exemplary. Chaplain’s report--Nothing doing (or words to that
effect). Work--Bookbinding. Quite! But--chief memory--that of a long
loose figure loping round at exercise, rather like a wolf. And there
he stood! The tall Governor felt at the moment oddly short. He raised
his hand from its posture of not too splendid isolation, and put the
closure with a gesture. No. 299’s lips moved:

“Is that all?”

Accustomed to being ‘sirred’ to the last, the Governor reddened. But
the accent was so refined that he decided not to mention it.

“Yes, that’s all.”

“Thank you. Good-morning.”

The eyes shone from under the brows, the smile curled the lips under
the long, fine, slightly hooked nose; the man loped easily to the door.
He carried his hands well. He made no noise going out. Damn! The fellow
had looked so exactly as if he had been thinking, ‘You poor devil!’
The Governor gazed round his office. Highly specialised life, no doubt!
The windows had bars; it was here that he saw refractory prisoners
in the morning, early. And, thrusting his hands into his pockets, he
frowned....

Outside, the head warder, straight, blue-clothed, grizzled, walked
ahead, with a bunch of keys.

“All in order,” he said to the blue-clothed janitor. “No. 299--going
out. Anyone waiting for him?”

“No, sir.”

“Right. Open!”

The door clanged under the key.

“Good-day to you,” said the head warder.

The released prisoner turned his smiling face and nodded; turned it to
the janitor, nodded again, and walked out between them, putting on a
grey felt hat. The door clanged under the key.

“Smiling!” remarked the janitor.

“Ah! Cool customer,” said the head warder. “Clever man, though, I’m
told.”

His voice sounded resentful, a little surprised, as if he had missed
the last word by saying it....

Hands in pockets, the released prisoner walked at leisure in the centre
of the pavement. An October day of misty sunshine, and the streets
full of people seeking the midday meal. And if they chanced to glance
at this passer-by their eyes would fly away at once, as a finger flies
from a too hot iron....


2 §

On the platform the prison chaplain, who had a day off and was going up
to town, saw a face under a grey hat which seemed vaguely familiar.

“Yes,” said a voice. “Late--299. Raider.”

The chaplain felt surprise.

“Oh, ah!” he stammered. “You went out to-day, I think. I hope you----”

“Don’t mention it!”

The train came clattering in. The chaplain entered a third-class
compartment; Late--299 followed. The chaplain experienced something of
a shock. Extremely unlike a prisoner! And this prisoner, out of whom
he had, so to speak, had no change whatever these two years past, had
always made him feel uncomfortable. There he sat opposite, turning
his paper, smoking a cigarette, as if on terms of perfect equality.
Lowering his own journal, the chaplain looked out of the window, trying
to select a course of conduct; then, conscious that he was being
stared at, he took a flying look at his _vis-à-vis_. The man’s face
seemed saying: “Feel a bit awkward, don’t you? But don’t worry. I’ve no
ill feeling. You have a devilish poor time.”

Unable to find the proper reply to this look, the chaplain remarked:

“Nice day. Country’s looking beautiful.”

Late--299 turned those shining eyes of his towards the landscape. The
man had a hungry face in spite of his smile; and the chaplain asked:

“Will you have a sandwich?”

“Thanks....”

“Forgive my enquiring,” said the chaplain presently, blowing crumbs off
his knees, “but what will you do now? I hope you’re going to----” How
could he put it? ‘Turn over a new leaf?’ ‘Make good?’ ‘Get going?’ He
could not put it; and instead took the cigarette which Late--299 was
offering him. The man was speaking too; his words seemed to come slowly
through the smoke, as if not yet used to a tongue.

“These last two years have been priceless.”

“Ah!” said the chaplain hopefully.

“I feel right on top.”

The chaplain’s spirit drooped.

“Do you mean,” he said, “that you don’t regret--that you
aren’t--er----?”

“Priceless!”

The man’s face had a lamentable look--steely, strangely smiling. No
humility in it at all. He would find Society did not tolerate such an
attitude. No, indeed! He would soon discover his place.

“I’m afraid,” he said kindly, “that you’ll find Society very
unforgiving. Have you a family?”

“Wife, son, and daughter.”

“How will they receive you?”

“Don’t know, I’m sure.”

“And your friends? I only want to prepare you a little.”

“Fortunately I have private means.”

The chaplain stared. What a piece of luck, or was it--a misfortune?

“If I’d been breakable, your prison would have broken me all right.
Have another cigarette?”

“No, thank you.”

The chaplain felt too sad. He had always said nothing could be done
with them so long as their will-power was unbroken. Distressing to see
a man who had received this great lesson still so stiff-necked; so far
from profiting by it. And, lifting his journal, he tried to read. But
those eyes seemed boring through the print. It was most uncomfortable.
Most!...


II


1 §

In the withdrawing-room of a small house near Kew Gardens, Mrs. Philip
Raider was gazing at a piece of pinkish paper in her hand, as if it had
been one of those spiders of which she had so constitutional a horror.
Opposite her chair her son had risen; and against the wall her daughter
had ceased suddenly to play Brahms’ Variations on a theme by Haydn.

“He says to-night!”

The girl dropped her hands from the keys. “To-night? I thought it was
next month. Just like father--without a word of warning!”

The son mechanically took out his pipe, and began polishing its bowl.
He was fresh-faced, fair, with a small head.

“Why didn’t he tell us to meet him in London? He must know we’ve got to
come to an arrangement.”

The daughter, too, got up, leaning against the piano--a slight figure,
with bushy, dark, short hair.

“What are we to do, Mother?”

“Jack must go round, and put Mabel and Roderick off for this evening.”

“Yes, and what then, if he’s going to stay here? Does he know that I’m
engaged, and Beryl too?”

“I think I told him in my last letter.”

“What are _you_ going to do, Mother?”

“It’s come so suddenly--I don’t know.”

“It’s indecent!” said the boy violently.

His sister picked up the dropped telegram. “‘Earl’s Court, five four.’
He may be here any minute. Jack, do hurry up! Doesn’t he _realise_ that
nobody knows, down here?”

Mrs. Raider turned to the fire.

“Your father will only have realised his own feelings.”

“Well, he’s got to begin with others. I’ll have to make him----!”

“Dr. Raider, ma’am.”

Late--299 stood, smiling, in front of the door which the maid had
closed behind him.

“Well, Bertha! Ah, Beryl! Well, Jack!”

His daughter alone replied.

“_Well_, Father, you might have let us know beforehand!”

Late--299 looked from one face to the other.

“Never tell children they’re going to have a powder. How are you all?”

“Perfectly well, thank you. How are you?”

“Never better. Healthy life--prison!”

As if walking in her sleep Mrs. Raider came across the room. She put
out her hand with a groping gesture. Late--299 did not take it.

“Rather nice here,” he said. “Can I have a wash?”

“Jack, show your father the lavatory.”

“The bathroom, please.”

The son crossed from the window, glanced at his father’s smiling face,
and led the way.

Mrs. Raider, thin, pale, dark, spoke first. “Poor Philip!”

“Oh, Mother! It’s impossible to pity father; it always was. Except for
his moustache being gone, I don’t see much change anyway. It’s you I
pity. He simply can’t stay here. Why, everybody thinks you’re a widow.”

“People generally know more than they seem to, Beryl.”

“Nobody’s ever given us a hint. Why couldn’t he have consulted us?”

“We must think of _him_.”

“He didn’t think of us when he did that horrible thing. And it was so
gratuitous, unless----! Mother, sometimes I’ve thought he had to do it;
that he was her--her lover as well as her doctor!”

Mrs. Raider shook her head.

“If it had been that, he’d have told me. Your father is always
justified in his own eyes.”

“What am I to do about Roddy?”

“We must just wait.”

“Here’s Jack! Well?”

“He’s having a bath as hot as he can bear it. All he said was: ‘This
is the first thing you do when you go in, and the first thing you do
when you come out--symmetrical, isn’t it?’ I’ve got to take him a cup
of coffee. It’s really too thick! The servants can’t help knowing that
a Dr. Raider who gets into the bath the moment he comes to call must be
our father.”

“It’s comic.”

“Is it? He doesn’t show a sign of shame. He’ll call it from the
house-tops. I thought, of course, he’d go abroad.”

“We all thought that.”

“If he were down in the mouth, one could feel sorry for him. But he
looks as pleased as Punch with himself. And it’s such a beastly sort of
crime--how am I to put it to Mabel? If I just say he’s been in prison,
she’ll think it’s something even worse. Mother, do insist on his going
at once. We can tell the servants he’s an uncle--who’s been in contact
with smallpox.”

“_You_ take him the coffee, Mother--oh, you can’t, if he’s to be an
uncle! Jack, tell him nobody here knows, and mother can’t stand it; and
hurry up! It’s half-past six now.”

The son passed his fingers through his brushed-back hair; his face
looked youthful, desperate.

“Shall I?”

Mrs. Raider nodded.

“Tell him, Jack, that I’ll come out to him, wherever he likes to
go; that I always expected him to arrange that; that this is--too
difficult----” She covered her lips with her hand.

“All right, Mother! I’ll jolly well make him understand. But don’t
launch out about it to the servants yet. Suppose it’s we who have to
go? It’s his house!”

“Is it, Mother?”

“Yes; I bought it with his money under the power of attorney he left.”

“Oh, isn’t that dreadful?”

“It’s _all_ dreadful, but we must consider _him_.”

The girl shook back her fuzzy hair.

“It does seem rather a case of ‘coldly received.’ But father’s always
been shut up in himself. He can’t expect us suddenly to slobber over
him. If he’s had a horrible time, so have we.”

“Well, shall I go?”

“Yes, take him the coffee. Be quick, my dear boy; and be nice to him!”

The son said with youthful grimness: “Oh, I’ll be nice!” and went.

“Mother, don’t look like that!”

“How should I look? Smiling?”

“No, don’t smile--it’s like _him_. Cry it off your chest.”


2 §

Late--299 was sitting in the bath, smiling through steam and the smoke
of his cigarette at his big toe. Raised just above the level of the
water, it had a nail blackened by some weight that had dropped on it.
He took the coffee-cup from his son’s hand.

“For two years and nine months I’ve been looking forward to this--but
it beats the band, Jack.”

“Father--I--ought----”

“Good coffee, tobacco, hot water--greatest blessings earth affords.
Half an hour in here, and--spotless, body and soul!”

“Father----!”

“Yes; is there anything you want to add?”

“We’ve--we’ve been here two years.”

“Not so long as I was there. Do you like it?”

“Yes.”

“I didn’t. Are you studying medicine?”

“No. Botany.”

“Good. You won’t have to do with human beings.”

“I’ve got the promise of a job in the Gardens here at the beginning of
next year. And I’m--I’m engaged.”

“Excellent. I believe in marrying young.”

“Beryl’s engaged too.”

“Your mother isn’t, by any chance?”

“Father!”

“My dear fellow, one expects to have been dropped. Why suppose one’s
family superior to other people’s? _Pas si bête!_”

Gazing at that smiling face where prison pallor was yielding to the
heat, above the neck whose sinews seemed unnaturally sharp and visible,
the boy felt a spasm of remorse.

“We’ve never had a proper chance to tell you how frightfully sorry
we’ve been for you. Only, we don’t understand even now why you did such
a thing.”

“Should I have done it if I’d thought it would have been spotted? A
woman going to the devil; a small risk to oneself--and there we were!
Never save anyone, at risk to yourself, Jack. I’m sure you agree.”

The boy’s face went very red. How could he ever get out what he had
come to say?

“I have no intention of putting my tail between my legs. D’you mind
taking this cup?”

“Will you have another, Father?”

“No, thanks. What time do you dine?”

“Half-past seven.”

“You might lend me a razor. I was shaved this morning with a sort of
billhook.”

“I’ll get you one.”

Away from that smiling stranger in the bath, the boy shook himself. He
must and would speak out!

When he came back with the shaving gear, his father was lying flat,
deeply immersed, with closed eyes. And setting his back against the
door, he blurted out: “Nobody knows down here. They think mother’s a
widow.”

The eyes opened, the smile resumed control.

“Do you really believe that?”

“I do; I know that Mabel--the girl I’m engaged to--has no suspicion.
She’s coming to dinner; so is Roddy Blades--Beryl’s _fiancé_.”

“Mabel, and Roddy Blades--glad to know their names. Give me that big
towel, there’s a good fellow. I’m going to wash my head.”

Handing him the towel, the boy turned. But at the door he stopped.
“Father----!”

“Quite. These natural relationships are fixed, beyond redemption.”

The boy turned and fled.

His mother and sister stood waiting at the foot of the stairs.

“Well?”

“It’s no good. I simply can’t tell him we want him to go.”

“No, my dear. I understand.”

“Oh! but, Mother----! Jack, you must.”

“I can’t; I’m going to put them off.” Seizing his hat, he ran. He ran
among small houses in the evening mist, trying to invent. At the corner
of the long row of little villas he rang a bell.

“Can I see Miss Mabel?”

“She’s dressing, sir. Will you come in?”

“No. I’ll wait here.”

In the small dark porch he tried to rehearse himself. ‘Awfully sorry!
Somebody had come--unexpectedly--on business!’ Yes! On what business?

“Hallo, Jack!”

A vision in the doorway--a fair head, a rosy, round, blue-eyed face
above a swansdown collar.

“Look here, darling--shut the door.”

“Why? What is it? Anything up?”

“Yes; something pretty badly up. You can’t come to-night, Mabel.”

“Don’t squeeze so hard! Why not?”

“Oh! well--there--there’s a reason.”

“I know. Your father’s come out!”

“What? How----?”

“But of course. We all know about him. We must be awfully nice to him.”

“D’you mean to say that Roddy and everybody---- We thought nobody knew.”

“Bless you, yes! Some people feel one way and some the other. I feel
the other.”

“Do you know what he did?”

“Yes; I got hold of the paper. I read the whole trial.”

“Why didn’t you tell me?”

“Why didn’t _you_?”

“It was too beastly. Well?”

“I think it was a shame.”

“But you can’t have that sort of thing allowed.”

“Why not?”

“Where would the population be?”

“Well, we’re over-populated. Everybody says so.”

“That’s quite another thing. This is the Law.”

“Look here! If you want to argue, come in. It’s jolly cold.”

“I don’t want to argue; I must go and tell Roddy. It’s an awful relief
about you, darling. Only--you don’t know my father.”

“Then I can’t come?”

“Not to-night. Mother----”

“Yes; I expect she’s frightfully glad.”

“Oh! yes--yes! She--yes!”

“Well, good-night. And look here--you go back. _I’ll_ tell Roddy. No!
Don’t rumple me!”

Running back between small houses, the boy thought: ‘Good God! How
queer! How upside-down! She--she----! It’s awfully modern!’


3 §

Late--299 sat in the firelight, a glass beside him, a cigarette between
his smiling lips. The cinders clicked, a clock struck. Eleven! He
pitched the stump of his cigarette into the ashes, stretched himself,
and rose. He went upstairs and opened the first door. The room was
dark. A faint voice said:

“Philip?”

“Yes.”

The light sprang out under his thumb. His wife was sitting up in bed,
her face pale, her lips moving:

“To-night--must you?”

Late--299 moved to the foot of the bed; his lips still smiled, his eyes
gazed hungrily.

“Not at all. We learn to contain ourselves in prison. No vile contacts?
Quite so. Good-night!”

The voice from the bed said faintly:

“Philip, I’m so sorry; it’s the suddenness--I’m----”

“Don’t mention it.” The light failed under his thumb. The door fell
to....

Three people lay awake, one sleeping. The three who lay awake were
thinking: ‘If only he made one feel sorry for him! If only one could
love him! His self-control is forbidding--it’s not human! He ought to
want our sympathy. He ought to sympathise with us. He doesn’t seem
to feel--for himself, for us, for anything. And to-morrow--what will
happen? Is life possible here, now? Can we stand him in the house,
about the place? He’s frightening!’

The sleeper, in his first bed of one thousand and one nights, lay, his
eyes pinched up between brows and bony cheeks of a face as if carved
from ivory, and his lips still smiling at the softness under him.

Past dawn the wakeful slept, the sleeper awoke. His eyes sought the
familiar little pyramid of gear on the shelf in the corner, the bright
tins below, the round porthole, the line of distemper running along
the walls, the closed and solid smallness of a cell. And the blood
left his heart. They weren’t there! His whole being struggled with such
unreality. He was in a room staring at light coming through chintz
curtains. His arms were not naked. This was a sheet! For a moment he
shivered, uncertain of everything; then lay back, smiling at a papered
ceiling.


III


1 §

“It can’t go on, Mother. It simply can’t. I feel an absolute worm
whenever I’m with him. I shall have to clear out, like Beryl. He has
just one object all the time--to make everyone feel small and mean.”

“Remember what he’s been through!”

“I don’t see why _we_ should be part of his revenge. We’ve done
nothing, except suffer through him.”

“He doesn’t want to hurt us or anyone.”

“Well, whenever people talk to him they dry up at once, as if he’d
skinned them. It’s a disease.”

“One can only pity him.”

“He’s perfectly happy, Mother. He’s getting his own back.”

“If only that first night----”

“We tried. It’s no good. He’s absolutely self-sufficient. What about
to-morrow night?”

“We can’t leave him on Christmas Day, Jack.”

“Then we must take him to Beryl’s. I can’t stick it here. Look! He’s
just going out!”

Late--299 passed the window where they stood, loping easily, a book
under his arm.

“He must have seen us. We mightn’t exist!...”


2 §

Late--299, with a book under his arm, entered Kew Gardens and sat down
on a bench. A nursery governess with her charges came and settled down
beside him.

“Peter, Joan, and Michael,” said Late--299, “quite in the fashion, for
names.”

The governess stirred uneasily; the gentleman looked funny, smiling
there!

“And what are you teaching them?”

“Reading, writing, and arithmetic, sir, and Bible stories.”

“Intelligent?... Ah! Not very. Truthful?... No! No children are.”

The governess twisted her hands. “Peter!” she said, “where’s your ball?
We must go and look for it.”

“But I’ve got it, Miss Somers.”

“Oh, well, it’s too sharp, sitting here. Come along!”

She passed away, and Peter, Joan, and Michael trailed after her.

Late--299 smiled on; and a Pekinese, towing a stout old lady, smelled
at his trousers.

“It’s my cat,” said Late--299. “Dogs and cats their pleasure is----”

Picking up the Pekinese, the stout old lady pressed it under her arm as
though it were a bagpipe, and hurried on like a flustered goose.

Some minutes passed. A workman and his wife sat down beside him, and
gazed at the Pagoda.

“Queer building!” said Late--299.

“Ah!” said the workman. “Japanese, they say!”

“Chinese, my friend. Good people, the Chinese--no regard for human
life.”

“What’s that? Good--did you say?”

“Quite!”

“Eh?”

The workman’s wife peered round him.

“Come on, John! The sun gits in me eyes ’ere.”

The workman rose. “‘Good,’ you said, didn’t you? _Good_ people?”

“Yes.”

The workman’s wife drew at his arm. “There, don’t get arguin’ with
strangers. Come on!” The workman was drawn away....

A clock struck twelve. Late--299 got up and left the Gardens. Walking
between small houses, he rang at the side entrance of a little shop.

“If your father’s still blind--I’ve come to read to him again.”

“Please, sir, he’ll always be.”

“So I supposed.”

On a horsehair sofa, below the dyed-red plumes of pampas grass, a short
and stocky man was sitting, whittling at a wooden figure. He sniffed,
and turned his sightless eyes towards his visitor; his square face in
every line and bump seemed saying: ‘You don’t down me.’

“What are you making?” said Late--299.

“Christmas Eve. I’m cuttin’ out our Lord. I make ’em rather nice. Would
you like this one?”

“Thank you.”

“Kep’ His end up well, our Lord, didn’t He? ‘Love your neighbour as
yourself’--that means you got to love yourself. And He did, I think;
not against Him, neither.”

“Easier to love your neighbours when you can’t see them, eh?”

“What’s that? D’you mind lendin’ me your face a minute? It’ll help me a
lot with this ’ere. I make ’em lifelike, you know.”

Late--299 leaned forward, and the tips of the blind man’s fingers
explored his features.

“’Igh cheekbones, eyes back in the ’ead, supraorbital ridges extra
special, rather low forehead slopin’ to thick hair. Comin’ down, two
’ollers under the cheekbones, thin nose a bit ’ooky, chin sharpish,
no moustache. You’ve got a smile, ’aven’t you? And your own teeth? I
should say you’d make a very good model. I don’t ’old with ’Im always
’avin’ a beard. Would you like the figure ’angin’, or carryin’ the
cross?”

“As you wish. D’you ever use your own face?”

“Not for ’Im--for statesmen or ’eroes I do. I done one of Captain
Scott with my face. Rather pugnacious, my style; yours is sharp, bit
acid, suitable to saints, martyrs, and that. I’ll just go over you
once more--then I’ll ’ave it all ’ere. Sharp neck; bit ’unchy in one
shoulder; ears stick up a bit; tallish thin man, ain’t you, and throw
your feet forward when you walk? Give us your ’and a minute. Bite your
fingers, I see. Eyes blue, eh--with pin-points to ’em--yes? Hair a bit
reddish before it went piebald--that right? Thank you, much obliged.
Now, if you like to read, I’ll get on with it.”

Late--299 opened the book.

... “‘But at last in the drift of time Hadleyburg had the ill-luck
to offend a passing stranger, possibly without knowing it, certainly
without caring, for Hadleyburg was sufficient unto itself and cared not
a rap for strangers and their opinions. Still, it would have been well
to make an exception in this one’s case, for he was a bitter man and
revengeful.’”

“Ah!” interjected the blind man deeply, “there you ’ave it. Talkin’ of
feelin’s, what gave you a fellow-feelin’ for me, if I may ask?”

“I can look at you, my friend, without your seeing me.”

“Eh! What about it with other people, then?”

“They can look at me without my seeing them.”

“I see! Misanthropical. Any reason for that?”

“Prison.”

“What oh! Outcast and rejected of men.”

“No. The other way on.”

The blind man ceased to whittle and scoop.

“I like independence,” he said; “I like a man that can go his own
way. Ever noticed cats? Men are like dogs, mostly; only once in a way
you get a man that’s like a cat. What _were_ you, if it’s not a rude
question. In the taxes?”

“Medico.”

“What’s a good thing for ’eartburn?”

“Which kind?”

“Wind, ain’t it? But I see your meanin’. Losin’ my sight used to burn
my ’eart a lot; but I got over that. What’s the use? You couldn’t have
any worse misfortune. It gives you a feelin’ of bein’ insured--like.”

“You’re right,” said Late--299, rising to go.

The blind man lifted his face in unison. “Got your smile on?” he said.
“Just let me ’ave another feel at it, will you?”

Late--299 bent to the outstretched fingers.

“Yes,” said the blind man, “same with you--touched bottom. Next time
you come I’ll ’ave something on show that’ll please you, I think; and
thank you for readin’.”

“Let me know if it bores you.”

“I will,” said the blind man, following without movement the footsteps
of his visitor that died away.


3 §

Christmas night--wild and windy, a shower spattering down in the
street; Late--299 walking two yards before his wife, their son walking
two yards behind his mother. A light figure, furred to the ears, in a
doorway watching for them.

“Come along, darling. Sorry we had to bring him.”

“Of course you had to, Jack!”

“Look! He can’t even walk with mother. It’s a disease. He went to
church to-day, and all through the sermon never took his eyes off--the
poor old vicar nearly broke down.”

“What was it about?”

“Brotherly love. Mother says he doesn’t mean it--but it’s like--what’s
that thing that stares?”

“A basilisk. I’ve been trying to put myself in his place, Jack. He must
have swallowed blood and tears in there--ordered about like a dog, by
common men, for three years nearly. If you don’t go under, you must
become inhuman. This is better than if he’d come out crawling.”

“Perhaps. Look out--the rain! I’ll turn your hood up, darling.” A
spattering shower, the whispering hushed....

A lighted open doorway, a red hall, a bunch of hanging mistletoe, a
girl beneath, with bushy hair.

“Happy Christmas, Father!”

“Thanks. Do you want to be kissed?”

“As you like. Well, Mother darling! Hallo, you two! Come in! Roddy,
take father’s coat.”

“How are you, sir? Beastly weather!”

“That was the advantage we had in prison. Weather never troubled us.
‘Peace and Goodwill’ in holly-berries! Very neat! They used to stick
them up in there. Christianity is a really remarkable fraud, don’t you
think?” ...

Once again those four in the street; and the bells chiming for midnight
service.

“What an evening!”

“Let them get out of hearing, Jack.”

“Worse than ever! My God, he’d turn the milk sour! And I thought liquor
might make him possible. He drank quite a lot.”

“Only a few days now, and then!...”

“Do you agree with mother that he doesn’t mean it, Mabel?”

“Oh, yes, I do.”

“The way he sits and smiles! Why doesn’t he get himself a desert to
smile in?”

“Perhaps he does....”


4 §

“’Ere you are!” said the blind man. “Best I can do under the circs.
’Ad a bit o’ trouble with the cross; got it too ’eavy, I’m afraid; but
thought you’d rather carry it.”

“Quite a masterpiece!”

“Speaking serious?” said the blind man. “You could improve it with a
box o’ colours; make it more ’uman-like.”

“I’ll do that.”

“I wouldn’t touch the face, nor the cross--leave ’em wooden; but the
hair and the dress, and the blood from the crown o’ thorns might be
all the better for a bit o’ brightenin’. How’s the man that corrupted
’Adleyburg?”

Late--299 opened the book.

“‘ ... Goodson looked him over, like as if he was hunting for a place
on him that he could despise the most; then he says: “So you are the
Committee of Enquiry, are you?” Sawlsberry said that was about what
he was. “H’m! Do they require particulars, or do you reckon a kind
of _general_ answer will do?” “If they require particulars I will
come back, Mr. Goodson; I will take the general answer first.” “Very
well, then; tell them to go to hell--I reckon that’s general enough.
And I’ll give you some advice, Sawlsberry; when you come back for the
particulars, fetch a basket to carry what’s left of yourself home in.”’”

The blind man chuckled.

“Ah! I like that Mark Twain. Nice sense o’ humour--nothin’ sickly.”

“Bark and quinine, eh?”

“Bark and bite,” said the blind man. “What do you think of ’uman nature
yourself?”

“Little or nothing.”

“And yet there’s a bit of all right about it, too. Look at you and
me; we got our troubles; and ’ere we are--jolly as sandboys! Be
self-sufficient, or you’ve got to suffer. That’s what you feel, ain’t
it? Am I mistook, or did you nod?”

“I did. Your eyes look as if they saw.”

“Bright, are they? You and me could ’ave sat down and cried ’em out any
time--couldn’t we? But we didn’t. That’s why I say there’s a bit of all
right about us. Put the world from you, and keep your pecker up. When
you can’t think worse of things than what you do, you’ll be ’appy--not
before. That’s right, ain’t it?”

“Quite.”

“Took me five years. ’Ow long were you about it?”

“Nearly three.”

“Well, you ’ad the advantage of birth and edjucation; I can tell that
from your voice--got a thin, mockin’ sound. _I_ started in a barber’s
shop; got mine in an accident with some ’aircurlers. What I miss most
is not bein’ able to go fishin’. No one to take me. Don’t you miss
cuttin’ people up?”

“No.”

“Well, I suppose a gent never gets a passion; I’d a perfect passion for
fishin’. Never missed Sunday, wet or fine. That’s why I learned this
carvin’--must ’ave an ’obby to go on with. Are you goin’ to write your
’istory? Am I wrong, or did you shake your ’ead?”

“I did. My hobby is watching the show go by.”

“That might ’ave suited me at one time--always liked to see the river
flowin’ down. I’m a bit of a philosopher myself. You ain’t, I should
say.”

“Why not?”

“Well, I’ve a fancy you want life to come to heel too much--misfortune
of bein’ a gent, perhaps. Am I right?”

Late--299 closed the book and rose. “Pride!” he said.

“Ah!” said the blind man, groping with his eyes, “that’s meat and drink
to you. Thought as much. Come again, if I don’t worry you.”

“And take you fishing?”

“Reelly? You will? Shake ’ands.”

Late--299 put out his hand. The blind man’s groped up and found it....


5 §

“Wednesday again, is it, partner, if I’m not troublin’ you?”

“Wednesday it is.”

At the door of his house, with the ‘catch’ in a straw bag, the blind
man stood a minute listening to his partner’s footsteps, then felt
his way in to his horsehair sofa under the pampas grass. Putting his
cold feet up under the rug, he heaved a sigh of satisfaction, and fell
asleep.

Between the bare acacias and lilac-bushes of the little villas
Late--299 passed on. Entering his house, he sought his study, and
stretched his feet towards the fire, and the cat, smelling him fishy,
sprang on to his knee.

“Philip, may I come in?”

“You may.”

“The servants have given notice. I wanted to say, wouldn’t you like to
give this up and go abroad with me?”

“Why this sudden sacrifice?”

“Oh, Philip! You make it so hard for me. What do you really want me to
do?”

“Take half my income, and go away.”

“What will you do, here, alone?”

“Get me a char. The cat and I love chars.”

“Philip!”

“Yes?”

“Won’t you tell me what’s in your heart? Do you want always to be
lonely like this?”

Late--299 looked up.

“Reality means nothing to those who haven’t lived with it. I do.”

“But why?”

“My dear Bertha--that is your name, I think?”

“Oh, God! You _are_ terrible!”

“What would you have me--a whining worm? Crawling to people I
despise--squirming from false position to false position? Do you want
humility; what is it you want?”

“I want you to be human.”

“Then you want what you have got. I _am_ so human that I’ll see the
world damned before I take its pity, or eat its salt. Leave me alone. I
am content.”

“Is there nothing I can do?”

“Yes; stand out of my firelight....”


6 §

Two figures, in the dark outside, before the uncurtained window.

“Look, Mabel!”

“Be careful! He may see. Whisper!”

“The window’s shut.”

“Oh, why doesn’t he draw the blinds--if he must sit like that?”


     “‘_A desert dark without a sound...._
      _And not a drop to eat or drink_
     _And a dark desert all around!_’


Jack, I pity him.”

“He doesn’t suffer. It’s being fond of people makes you suffer. He’s
got all he wants. Look at him.”

The firelight on the face--its points and hollows, its shining eyes,
its stillness and intensity, its smile; and on the cat, hunched and
settled in the curve of the warm body. And the two young people,
shrinking back, pass on between small houses, clutching each other’s
hands.

1923.




HAD A HORSE


I

Some quarter of a century ago, there abode in Oxford a small bookmaker
called James Shrewin--or more usually ‘Jimmy’--a run-about and
damped-down little man, who made a precarious living out of the effect
of horses on undergraduates. He had a so-called office just off the
‘Corn,’ where he was always open to the patronage of the young bloods
of Bullingdon, and other horse-loving coteries, who bestowed on him
sufficient money to enable him to live. It was through the conspicuous
smash of one of them--young Gardon Colquhoun--that he became the owner
of a horse. He had been far from wanting what was in the nature of
a white elephant to one of his underground habits, but had taken it
in discharge of betting debts, to which, of course, in the event of
bankruptcy, he would have no legal claim. She was a three-year old
chestnut filly, by Lopez out of Calendar, bore the name of Calliope,
and was trained out on the Downs near Wantage. On a Sunday afternoon,
then, in late July, ‘Jimmy’ got his friend, George Pulcher, the
publican, to drive him out there in his sort of dog-cart.

“Must ’ave a look at the bilkin’ mare,” he had said; “that young
‘Cocoon’ told me she was a corker; but what’s third to Referee at
Sandown, and never ran as a two-year-old? All I know is, she’s eatin’
’er ’ead off!”

Beside the plethoric bulk of Pulcher, clad in a light-coloured
box-cloth coat with enormous whitish buttons and a full-blown rose
in the lapel, ‘Jimmy’s’ little, thin, dark-clothed form, withered
by anxiety and gin, was, as it were, invisible; and compared with
Pulcher’s setting sun, his face, with shaven cheeks sucked in, and
smudged-in eyes, was like a ghost’s under a grey bowler. He spoke
offhandedly about his animal, but he was impressed, in a sense abashed,
by his ownership. ‘What the ’ell?’ was his constant thought. Was he
going to race her, sell her--what? How, indeed, to get back out of her
the sum he had been fool enough to let young ‘Cocoon’ owe him, to say
nothing of her trainer’s bill? The notion, too, of having to confront
that trainer with his ownership was oppressive to one whose whole life
was passed in keeping out of the foreground of the picture. Owner! He
had never owned even a white mouse, let alone a white elephant. And an
’orse would ruin him in no time if he didn’t look alive about it!

The son of a small London baker, devoted to errandry at the age of
fourteen, ‘Jimmy’ Shrewin owed his profession to a certain smartness
at sums, a dislike of baking, and an early habit of hanging about
street corners with other boys, who had their daily pennies on an
’orse. He had a narrow, calculating head, which pushed him towards
street corner books before he was eighteen. From that time on he had
been a surreptitious nomad, till he had silted up at Oxford, where,
owing to Vice-Chancellors, an expert in underground life had greater
scope than elsewhere. When he sat solitary at his narrow table in the
back room near the ‘Corn’--for he had no clerk or associate--eyeing
the door, with his lists in a drawer before him, and his black shiny
betting-book ready for young ‘bloods,’ he had a sharp, cold, furtive
air, and but for a certain imitated tightness of trouser, and a collar
standing up all round, gave no impression of ever having heard of the
quadruped called horse. Indeed, for ‘Jimmy’ ‘horse’ was a newspaper
quantity with figures against its various names. Even when, for a
short spell, hanger-on to a firm of Cheap Ring bookmakers, he had seen
almost nothing of horse; his racecourse hours were spent ferreting
among a bawling, perspiring crowd, or hanging round within earshot
of tight-lipped nobs, trainers, jockeys, anyone who looked like
having ‘information.’ Nowadays he never went near a race-meeting--his
business, of betting on races, giving him no chance--yet his
conversation seldom deviated for more than a minute at a time from that
physically unknown animal, the horse. The ways of making money out
of it, infinite, intricate, variegated, occupied the mind in all his
haunts, to the accompaniment of liquid and tobacco. Gin and bitters was
‘Jimmy’s’ drink; for choice he smoked cheroots; and he would cherish
in his mouth the cold stump of one long after it had gone out, for the
homely feeling it gave him, while he talked, or listened to talk on
horses. He was of that vast number, town bred, who, like crows round
a carcase, feed on that which to them is not alive. And now he had a
horse!

The dog-cart travelled at a clinking pace behind Pulcher’s bobtail.
‘Jimmy’s’ cheroot burned well in the warm July air; the dust powdered
his dark clothes and pinched, sallow face. He thought with malicious
pleasure of that young spark ‘Cocoon’s’ collapse--high-’anded lot of
young fools, thinking themselves so knowing; many were the grins, and
not few the grittings of his blackened teeth he had to smother at
their swagger. ‘Jimmy, you robber!’ ‘Jimmy, you little blackguard!’
Young sparks--gay and languid--well, one of ’em had gone out!

He looked round with his screwed-up eyes at his friend George Pulcher,
who, man and licensed victualler, had his bally independence; lived
remote from ‘the Quality’ in his paradise, the Green Dragon; had not
to kowtow to anyone; went to Newbury, Gatwick, Stockbridge, here and
there, at will. Ah! George Pulcher had the ideal life--and looked
it: crimson, square, full-bodied. Judge of a horse, too, in his own
estimation; a leery bird--for whose judgment ‘Jimmy’ had respect--who
got ‘the office’ of any clever work as quick as most men! And he said:

“What am I going to do with this blinkin’ ’orse, George?”

Without moving its head the oracle spoke in a voice rich and raw:
“Let’s ’ave a look at her first, Jimmy! Don’t like her name--Calliope;
but you can’t change what’s in the Stud-book. This Jenning that trains
’er is a crusty chap.”

‘Jimmy’ nervously sucked-in his lips. The cart was mounting through the
hedgeless fields which fringed the Downs; larks were singing, the wheat
was very green, the patches of charlock brightened everything; it was
lonely, few trees, few houses, no people, extreme peace, just a few
rooks crossing under a blue sky.

“Wonder if he’ll offer us a drink?” said ‘Jimmy.’

“Not he; but help yourself, my son.”

‘Jimmy’ helped himself from a large wicker-covered flask.

“Good for you, George--here’s how!”

The large man shifted the reins and drank, in turn, tilting up a face
whose jaw still struggled to assert itself against chins and neck.

“Well, here’s to your bloomin’ horse,” he said. “She can’t win the
Derby now, but she may do us a bit of good yet.”


II

The trainer, Jenning, coming from his Sunday afternoon round of the
boxes, heard the sound of wheels. He was a thin man, neat in clothes
and boots, medium in height, with a slight limp, narrow grey whiskers,
thin shaven lips, eyes sharp and grey.

A dog-cart stopping at his yard-gate; and a rum-looking couple of
customers!

“Well, gentlemen?”

“Mr. Jenning? My name’s Pulcher--George Pulcher. Brought a client of
yours over to see his new mare. Mr. James Shrewin, Oxford city.”

‘Jimmy’ got down and stood before his trainer’s uncompromising stare.

“What mare’s that?” said Jenning.

“Callĭōpe.”

“Callīŏpĕ--Mr. Colquhoun’s?”

‘Jimmy’ held out a letter.


     “DEAR JENNING,

     “I have sold Calliope to Jimmy Shrewin, the Oxford bookie. He
     takes her with all engagements and liabilities, including your
     training bill. I’m frightfully sick at having to part with her,
     but needs must when the devil drives.

     “GARDON COLQUHOUN.”


The trainer folded the letter.

“Got proof of registration?”

‘Jimmy’ drew out another paper.

The trainer inspected it, and called out: “Ben, bring out Calliope.
Excuse me a minute,” and he walked into his house.

‘Jimmy’ stood, shifting from leg to leg. Mortification had set in; the
dry abruptness of the trainer had injured even a self-esteem starved
from youth.

The voice of Pulcher boomed. “Told you he was a crusty devil. ’And ’im
a bit of his own.”

The trainer was coming back.

“My bill,” he said. “When you’ve paid it you can have the mare. I train
for gentlemen.”

“The hell you do!” said Pulcher.

‘Jimmy’ said nothing, staring at the bill. Seventy-eight pounds three
shillings! A buzzing fly settled in the hollow of his cheek, and he did
not even brush it off. Seventy-eight pound!

The sound of hoofs roused him. Here came his horse, throwing up her
head as if enquiring why she was being disturbed a second time on
Sunday! In the movement of that small head and satin neck was something
free and beyond present company.

“There she is,” said the trainer. “That’ll do, Ben. Stand, girl!”

Answering to a jerk or two of the halter, the mare stood kicking
slightly with a white hind foot and whisking her tail. Her bright coat
shone in the sunlight, and little shivers and wrinklings passed up and
down its satin because of the flies. Then, for a moment, she stood
still, ears pricked, eyes on the distance.

‘Jimmy’ approached her. She had resumed her twitchings, swishings, and
slight kicking, and at a respectful distance he circled, bending as
if looking at crucial points. He knew what her sire and dam had done,
and all the horses that had beaten or been beaten by them; could have
retailed by the half-hour the peculiar hearsay of their careers; and
here was their offspring in flesh and blood, and he was dumb! He didn’t
know a thing about what she ought to look like, and he knew it; but he
felt obscurely moved. She seemed to him ‘a picture.’

Completing his circle, he approached her head, white-blazed, thrown up
again in listening, or scenting, and gingerly he laid his hand on her
neck, warm and smooth as a woman’s shoulder. She paid no attention to
his touch, and he took his hand away. Ought he to look at her teeth or
feel her legs? No, he was not buying her, she was his already; but he
must say something. He looked round. The trainer was watching him with
a little smile. For almost the first time in his life the worm turned
in ‘Jimmy’ Shrewin; he spoke no word and walked back to the cart.

“Take her in,” said Jenning.

From his seat beside Pulcher, ‘Jimmy’ watched the mare returning to her
box.

“When I’ve cashed your cheque,” said the trainer, “you can send for
her;” and, turning on his heel, he went towards his house. The voice of
Pulcher followed him.

“Blast your impudence! Git on, bobtail, we’ll shake the dust off ’ere.”


Among the fringing fields the dog-cart hurried away. The sun slanted,
the heat grew less, the colour of young wheat and of the charlock
brightened.

“The tyke! By Gawd, Jimmy, I’d ’ave hit him on the mug! But you’ve got
one there. She’s a bit o’ blood, my boy; and I know the trainer for
her, Polman--no blasted airs about ’im.”

‘Jimmy’ sucked at his cheroot.

“I ain’t had your advantages, George, and that’s a fact. I got into
it too young, and I’m a little chap. But I’ll send the ---- my cheque
to-morrow. I got my pride, I ’ope.” It was the first time that thought
had ever come to him.


III

Though not quite the centre of the Turf, the Green Dragon had nursed
a _coup_ in its day, nor was it without a sense of veneration. The
ownership of Calliope invested ‘Jimmy’ Shrewin with the importance of
those out of whom something can be had. It took time for one so long
accustomed to beck and call, to mole-like procedure, and the demeanour
of young bloods, to realise that he had it. But slowly, with the marked
increase of his unpaid-for cheroots, with the way in which glasses
hung suspended when he came in, with the edgings up to him, and a
certain tendency to accompany him along the street, it dawned on him
that he was not only an out-of-bounds bookie, but a man. So long as
he had remained unconscious of his double nature he had been content
with laying the odds, as best he might, and getting what he could out
of every situation, straight or crooked. Now that he was also a man,
his complacency was ruffled. He suffered from a growing headiness
connected with his horse. She was trained, now, by Polman, further
along the Downs, too far for Pulcher’s bobtail; and though her public
life was carried on at the Green Dragon, her private life required a
train journey over night. ‘Jimmy’ took it twice a week--touting his own
horse in the August mornings up on the Downs, without drink or talk, or
even cheroots. Early morning, larks singing, and the sound of galloping
hoofs! In a moment of expansion he confided to Pulcher that it was
‘bally ’olesome.’

There had been the slight difficulty of being mistaken for a tout by
his new trainer, Polman, a stoutish man with the look of one of those
large sandy Cornish cats, not precisely furtive because reticence and
craft are their nature. But, that once over, his personality swelled
slowly. This month of August was one of those interludes, in fact,
when nothing happens, but which shape the future by secret ripening.

An error to suppose that men conduct finance, high or low, from greed,
or love of gambling; they do it out of self-esteem, out of an itch to
prove their judgment superior to their neighbours’, out of a longing
for importance. George Pulcher did not despise the turning of a penny,
but he valued much more the consciousness that men were saying: “Old
George, what ’e says goes--knows a thing or two--George Pulcher!”

To pull the strings of ‘Jimmy’ Shrewin’s horse was a rich and subtle
opportunity absorbingly improvable. But first one had to study the
animal’s engagements, and, secondly, to gauge that unknown quantity,
her ‘form.’ To make anything of her this year they must ‘get about it.’
That young ‘toff,’ her previous owner, had, of course, flown high,
entering her for classic races, high-class handicaps, neglecting the
rich chances of lesser occasions.

Third to Referee in the three-year-old race at Sandown Spring--two
heads--was all that was known of her, and now they had given her seven
two in the Cambridgeshire. She might have a chance, and again she might
not. He sat two long evenings with ‘Jimmy’ in the little private room
off the bar, deliberating this grave question.

‘Jimmy’ inclined to the bold course. He kept saying: “The mare’s a
flyer, George--she’s the ’ell of a flyer!”

“Wait till she’s been tried,” said the oracle.

Had Polman anything that would give them a line?

Yes, he had The Shirker (named with that irony which appeals to the
English), one of the most honest four-year-olds that ever looked
through bridle, who had run up against almost every animal of mark--the
one horse that Polman never interfered with, or interrupted in his
training lest he should run all the better; who seldom won, but was
almost always placed--the sort of horse that handicappers pivot on.

“But,” said Pulcher, “try her with The Shirker, and the first stable
money will send her up to tens. That ’orse is so darned regular. We’ve
got to throw a bit of dust first, ‘Jimmy.’ I’ll go over and see Polman.”

In ‘Jimmy’s’ withered chest a faint resentment rose--it wasn’t George’s
horse; but it sank again beneath his friend’s bulk and reputation.

The ‘bit of dust’ was thrown at the ordinary hour of exercise over
the Long Mile on the last day of August--the five-year-old Hangman
carrying eight stone seven, the three-year-old Parrot seven stone five;
what Calliope was carrying nobody but Polman knew. The forethought of
George Pulcher had secured the unofficial presence of the Press. The
instructions to the boy on Calliope were to be there at the finish if
he could, but on no account to win. ‘Jimmy’ and George Pulcher had
come out over night. They sat together in the dog-cart by the clump of
bushes which marked the winning-post, with Polman on his cob on the far
side.

By a fine, warm light the three horses were visible to the naked eye in
the slight dip down by the start. And, through the glasses, invested in
now that he had a horse, ‘Jimmy’ could see every movement of his mare
with her blazed face--rather on her toes, like the bright chestnut and
‘bit o’ blood’ she was. He had a pit-patting in his heart, and his lips
were tight-pressed. Suppose she was no good after all, and that young
‘Cocoon’ had palmed him off a pup! But mixed in with his financial fear
was an anxiety more intimate, as if his own value were at stake.

From George Pulcher came an almost excited gurgle.

“See the tout! See ’im behind that bush. Thinks we don’t know ’e’s
there, wot oh!”

‘Jimmy’ bit into his cheroot. “They’re running,” he said.

Rather wide, the black Hangman on the far side, Calliope in the middle,
they came sweeping up the Long Mile. ‘Jimmy’ held his tobaccoed breath.
The mare was going freely--a length or two behind--making up her
ground! Now for it!

Ah! she ’ad The ’Angman beat, and ding-dong with this Parrot! It was
all he could do to keep from calling out. With a rush and a cludding
of hoofs they passed--the blazed nose just behind The Parrot’s bay
nose--dead heat all but, with The Hangman beaten a good length!

“There ’e goes, Jimmy! See the blank scuttlin’ down the ’ill like a
blinkin’ rabbit. That’ll be in to-morrow’s paper, that trial will. Ah!
but ’ow to read it--that’s the point.”

The horses had been wheeled and were sidling back; Polman was going
forward on his cob.

‘Jimmy’ jumped down. Whatever that fellow had to say, he meant to hear.
It was his horse! Narrowly avoiding the hoofs of his hot, fidgeting
mare, he said sharply:

“What about it?”

Polman never looked you in the face; his speech came as if not intended
to be heard by anyone:

“Tell Mr. Shrewin how she went.”

“Had a bit up my sleeve. If I’d hit her a smart one, I could ha’ landed
by a length or more.”

“That so?” said ‘Jimmy’ with a hiss. “Well, _don’t_ you hit her; she
don’t want hittin’. You remember that.”

The boy said sulkily: “All right!”

“Take her home,” said Polman. Then, with that reflective averted air of
his, he added: “She was carrying eight stone, Mr. Shrewin; you’ve got a
good one there. She’s The Hangman at level weights.”

Something wild leaped up in ‘Jimmy’--The Hangman’s form unrolled itself
before him in the air--he had a horse--he dam’ well had a horse!


IV

But how delicate is the process of backing your fancy! The planting of
a commission--what tender and efficient work before it will flower!
That sixth sense of the racing man, which, like the senses of savages
in great forests, seizes telepathically on what is not there, must be
dulled, duped, deluded.

George Pulcher had the thing in hand. One might have thought the gross
man incapable of such a fairy touch, such power of sowing with one
hand and reaping with the other. He intimated rather than asserted that
Calliope and The Parrot were one and the same thing. “The Parrot,”
he said, “couldn’t win with seven stone--no use thinkin’ of this
Callĭōpe.”

Local opinion was the rock on which, like a great tactician, he built.
So long as local opinion was adverse, he could dribble money on in
London; the natural jump-up from every long shot taken was dragged back
by the careful radiation of disparagement from the seat of knowledge.

‘Jimmy’ was the fly in his ointment of those balmy early weeks while
snapping up every penny of long odds, before suspicion could begin to
work from the persistence of enquiry. Half-a-dozen times he found the
‘little cuss within an ace of blowing the gaff on his own blinkin’
mare’; seemed unable to run his horse down; the little beggar’s head
was swellin’! Once ‘Jimmy’ had even got up and gone out, leaving a gin
and bitters untasted on the bar. Pulcher improved on his absence in the
presence of a London tout.

“Saw the trial meself! Jimmy don’t like to think he’s got a stiff ’un.”

And next morning his London agent snapped up some thirty-threes again.

According to the trial the mare was The Hangman at seven stone two, and
really hot stuff--a seven to one chance. It was none the less with a
sense of outrage that, opening the _Sporting Life_ on the last day of
September, he found her quoted at 100--8. Whose work was this?

He reviewed the altered situation in disgust. He had invested about
half the stable commission of three hundred pounds at an average of
thirty to one, but, now that she had ‘come’ in the betting, he would
hardly average tens with the rest. What fool had put his oar in?

He learned the explanation two days later. The rash, the unknown
backer, was ‘Jimmy’! He had acted, it appeared, from jealousy; a
bookmaker--it took one’s breath away!

“Backed her on your own just because that young ‘Cocoon’ told you he
fancied her!”

‘Jimmy’ looked up from the table in his ‘office,’ where he was sitting
in wait for the scanty custom of the Long Vacation.

“She’s not _his_ horse,” he said sullenly. “I wasn’t going to have
_him_ get the cream.”

“What did you put on?” growled Pulcher.

“Took five hundred to thirty and fifteen twenties.”

“An’ see what it’s done--knocked the bottom out of the commission. Am I
to take that fifty as part of it?”

‘Jimmy’ nodded.

“That leaves an ’undred to invest,” said Pulcher, somewhat mollified.
He stood, with his mind twisting in his thick, still body. “It’s no
good waitin’ now,” he said; “I’ll work the rest of the money on to-day.
If I can average tens on the balance, we’ll ’ave six thousand three
hundred to play with and the stakes. They tell me Jenning fancies this
Diamond Stud of his. _He_ ought to know the form with Callĭōpe,
blast him! We got to watch that.”

They had! Diamond Stud, a four-year-old with eight stone two, was being
backed as if the Cambridgeshire were over. From fifteens he advanced
to sevens, thence to favouritism at fives. Pulcher bit on it. Jenning
_must_ know where he stood with Calliope! It meant--it meant she
couldn’t win! The tactician wasted no time in vain regret. Establish
Calliope in the betting and lay off! The time had come to utilise The
Shirker.

It was misty on the Downs--fine weather mist of a bright October. The
three horses became spectral on their way to the starting-point. Polman
had thrown The Parrot in again, but this time he made no secret of the
weights. The Shirker was carrying eight seven, Calliope eight, The
Parrot seven stone.

Once more, in the cart, with his glasses sweeping the bright mist,
‘Jimmy’ had that pit-patting in his heart. Here they came! His mare
leading--all riding hard--a genuine finish! They passed--The Shirker
beaten a clear length, with the Parrot at his girth. Beside him in the
cart, George Pulcher mumbled:

“She’s The Shirker at eight stone four, Jimmy!”

A silent drive back to the river inn, big with thought; a silent
breakfast. Over a tankard at the close the oracle spoke.

“The Shirker, at eight stone four, is a good ’ot chance, but no cert,
Jimmy. We’ll let ’em know this trial quite open, weights and all.
That’ll bring her in the betting. And we’ll watch Diamond Stud. If he
drops back we’ll know Jenning thinks he can’t beat us now. If Diamond
Stud stands up we’ll know Jenning thinks he’s still got our mare safe.
Then our line’ll be clear: we lay off the lot, pick up a thousand or
so, and ’ave the mare in at a nice weight at Liverpool.”

‘Jimmy’s’ smudged-in eyes stared hungrily.

“How’s that?” he said. “Suppose she wins?”

“Wins! If we lay off the lot, she _won’t_ win.”

“Pull her!”

George Pulcher’s voice sank half an octave with disgust.

“Pull her! Who talked of pullin’? She’ll run a bye, that’s all. We
shan’t ever know whether she could ’a won or not.”

‘Jimmy’ sat silent; the situation was such as his life during sixteen
years had waited for. They stood to win both ways with a bit of
handling.

“Who’s to ride?” he said.

“Polman’s got a call on Docker. He can just ride the weight. Either way
he’s good for us--strong finisher and a rare judge of distance; knows
how to time things to a T. Win or not, he’s our man.”

‘Jimmy’ was deep in figures. Laying-off at sevens, they would still win
four thousand and the stakes.

“I’d like a win,” he said.

“Ah!” said Pulcher. “But there’ll be twenty in the field, my son; no
more uncertain race than that bally Cambridgeshire. We could pick up
a thou. as easy as I pick up this pot. Bird in the ’and, Jimmy, and a
good ’andicap in the bush. If she wins, she’s finished. Well, we’ll put
this trial about and see ’ow Jenning pops.”

Jenning popped amazingly. Diamond Stud receded a point, then
re-established himself at nine to two. Jenning was clearly not dismayed.

George Pulcher shook his head and waited, uncertain still which way to
jump. Ironical circumstance decided him.

Term had begun; ‘Jimmy’ was busy at his seat of custom. By some miracle
of guardianly intervention, young Colquhoun had not gone broke. He
was ‘up’ again, eager to retrieve his reputation, and that little
brute ‘Jimmy’ would not lay against his horse! He merely sucked-in his
cheeks, and answered: “I’m not layin’ my own ’orse.” It was felt that
he was not the man he had been; assertion had come into his manner, he
was better dressed. Someone had seen him at the station looking quite
a ‘toff’ in a blue box-cloth coat standing well out from his wisp of a
figure, and with a pair of brown race-glasses slung over the shoulder.
Altogether the ‘little brute was getting too big for his boots.’

And this strange improvement hardened the feeling that his horse was a
real good thing. Patriotism began to burn in Oxford. Here was a ‘snip’
that belonged to them, as it were, and the money in support of it,
finding no outlet, began to ball.

A week before the race--with Calliope at nine to one, and very little
doing--young Colquhoun went up to town, taking with him the accumulated
support of betting Oxford. That evening she stood at sixes. Next day
the public followed on.

George Pulcher took advantage. In this crisis of the proceedings he
acted on his own initiative. The mare went back to eights, but the deed
was done. He had laid off the whole bally lot, including the stake
money. He put it to ‘Jimmy’ that evening in a nutshell.

“We pick up a thousand, and the Liverpool as good as in our pocket.
I’ve done worse.”

‘Jimmy’ grunted out: “She could ’a won.”

“Not she. Jenning knows--and there’s others in the race. This Wasp is
goin’ to take a lot of catchin’, and Deerstalker’s not out of it. He’s
a hell of a horse, even with that weight.”

Again ‘Jimmy’ grunted, slowly sucking down his gin and bitters.
Sullenly he said:

“Well, I don’ want to put money in the pocket of young ‘Cocoon’ and his
crowd. Like his impudence, backin’ my horse as if it was his own.”

“We’ll ’ave to go and see her run, Jimmy.”

“Not me,” said ‘Jimmy.’

“What! First time she runs! It won’t look natural.”

“No,” repeated ‘Jimmy.’ “I don’t want to see ’er beat.”

George Pulcher laid his hand on a skinny shoulder.

“Nonsense, Jimmy. You’ve got to, for the sake of your reputation.
You’ll enjoy seein’ your mare saddled. We’ll go up over night. I shall
’ave a few pound on Deerstalker. I believe he can beat this Diamond
Stud. And you leave Docker to me; I’ll ’ave a word with him at Gatwick
to-morrow. I’ve known ’im since he was that ’igh; an’ ’e ain’t much
more now.”

“All right!” growled ‘Jimmy.’


V

The longer you can bet on a race the greater its fascination.
Handicappers can properly enjoy the beauty of their work; clubmen and
oracles of the course have due scope for reminiscence and prophecy;
bookmakers in lovely leisure can indulge a little their own calculated
preferences, instead of being hurried to soulless conclusions by a
half-hour’s market on the course; the professional backer has the
longer in which to dream of his fortune made at last by some hell of a
horse--spotted somewhere as interfered with, left at the post, running
green, too fat, not fancied, backward--now bound to win this hell of a
race. And the general public has the chance to read the horses’ names
in the betting news for days and days; and what a comfort that is!

‘Jimmy’ Shrewin was not one of those philosophers who justify the
great and growing game of betting on the ground that it improves the
breed of an animal less and less in use. He justified it much more
simply--he lived by it. And in the whole of his career of nearly twenty
years since he made hole-and-corner books among the boys of London,
he had never stood so utterly on velvet as that morning when his
horse must win him five hundred pounds by merely losing. He had spent
the night in London anticipating a fraction of his gains with George
Pulcher at a music-hall. And, in a first-class carriage, as became an
owner, he travelled down to Newmarket by an early special. An early
special key turned in the lock of the carriage door, preserved their
numbers at six, all professionals, with blank, rather rolling eyes,
mouths shut or slightly fishy, ears to the ground; and the only natural
talker a red-faced man, who had ‘been at it thirty years.’ Intoning the
pasts and futures of this hell of a horse or that, even he was silent
on the race in hand; and the journey was half over before the beauty of
their own judgments loosened tongues thereon. George Pulcher started it.

“I fancy Deerstalker,” he said; “he’s a hell of a horse.”

“Too much weight,” said the red-faced man. “What about this Calliope?”

“Ah!” said Pulcher. “D’you fancy your mare, Jimmy?”

With all eyes turned on him, lost in his blue box-cloth coat, brown
bowler, and cheroot smoke, ‘Jimmy’ experienced a subtle thrill.
Addressing the space between the red-faced man and Pulcher, he said:

“If she runs up to ’er looks.”

“Ah!” said Pulcher, “she’s dark--nice mare, but a bit light and shelly.”

“Lopez out o’ Calendar,” muttered the red-faced man. “Lopez didn’t
stay, but he was the hell of a horse over seven furlongs. The Shirker
ought to ’ave told you a bit.”

‘Jimmy’ did not answer. It gave him pleasure to see the red-faced man’s
eye trying to get past, and failing.

“Nice race to pick up. Don’t fancy the favourite meself; he’d nothin’
to beat at Ascot.”

“Jenning knows what he’s about,” said Pulcher.

Jenning! Before ‘Jimmy’s’ mind passed again that first sight of his
horse, and the trainer’s smile, as if he--‘Jimmy’ Shrewin, who owned
her--had been dirt. Tyke! To have the mare beaten by one of his! A
deep, subtle vexation had oppressed him at times all these last days
since George Pulcher had decided in favour of the mare’s running a
bye. D----n George Pulcher! He took too much on himself! Thought he
had ‘Jimmy’ Shrewin in his pocket! He looked at the block of crimson
opposite. Aunt Sally! If George Pulcher could tell what was passing in
his mind!

But driving up to the course he was not above sharing a sandwich and
a flask. In fact, his feelings were unstable and gusty--sometimes
resentment, sometimes the old respect for his friend’s independent
bulk. The dignity of ownership takes long to establish itself in those
who have been kicked about.

“All right with Docker,” murmured Pulcher, sucking at the wicker flask.
“I gave him the office at Gatwick.”

“She could ’a won,” muttered ‘Jimmy.’

“Not she, my boy; there’s two at least can beat ’er.”

Like all oracles, George Pulcher could believe what he wanted to.

Arriving, they entered the grand-stand enclosure, and over the dividing
railings ‘Jimmy’ gazed at the Cheap Ring, already filling-up with its
usual customers. Faces, and umbrellas--the same old crowd. How often
had he been in that Cheap Ring, with hardly room to move, seeing
nothing, hearing nothing but “Two to one on the field!” “Two to one on
the field!” “Threes Swordfish!” “Fives Alabaster!” “Two to one on the
field!” Nothing but a sea of men like himself, and a sky overhead. He
was not exactly conscious of criticism, only of a dull ‘Glad I’m shut
of that lot’ feeling.

Leaving George Pulcher deep in conversation with a crony, he lighted a
cheroot, and slipped out on to the course. He passed the Jockey Club
enclosure. Some early ‘toffs’ were there in twos and threes, exchanging
wisdom. He looked at them without envy or malice. He was an owner
himself now, almost one of them in a manner of thinking. With a sort of
relish he thought of how his past life had circled round those ‘toffs,’
slippery, shadowlike, kicked about; and now he could get up on the
Downs away from ‘toffs,’ George Pulcher, all that crowd, and smell the
grass, and hear the bally larks, and watch his own mare gallop!

They were putting the numbers up for the first race. Queer not to be
betting, not to be touting round; queer to be giving it a rest! Utterly
familiar with those names on the board, he was utterly unfamiliar with
the shapes they stood for.

‘I’ll go and see ’em come out of the paddock,’ he thought, and moved
on, skimpy in his bell-shaped coat and billycock with flattened brim.
The clamour of the Rings rose behind him while he was entering the
paddock.

Very green, very peaceful, there; not many people, yet! Three horses in
the second race were being led slowly in a sort of winding ring; and
men were clustering round the further gate where the horses would come
out. ‘Jimmy’ joined them, sucking at his cheroot. They were a picture!
Damn it! he didn’t know but that ’orses laid over men! Pretty creatures!

One by one they passed out of the gate, a round dozen. Selling platers,
but pictures for all that!

He turned back towards the horses being led about; and the old instinct
to listen took him close to little groups. Talk was all of the big
race. From a tall ‘toff’ he caught the word Calliope.

“Belongs to a bookie, they say.”

Bookie! Why not? Wasn’t a bookie as good as any other? Ah! and
sometimes better than these young snobs with everything to their hand!
A bookie--well, what chance had he ever had?

A big brown horse came by.

“That’s Deerstalker,” he heard the ‘toff’ say.

‘Jimmy’ gazed at George Pulcher’s fancy with a sort of hostility. Here
came another--Wasp, six stone ten, and Deerstalker nine stone--top and
bottom of the race!

‘My ’orse’d beat either o’ them,’ he thought stubbornly. ‘Don’t like
that Wasp.’

The distant roar was hushed. They were running in the first race! He
moved back to the gate. The quick clamour rose and dropped, and here
they came--back into the paddock, darkened with sweat, flanks heaving a
little!

‘Jimmy’ followed the winner, saw the jockey weigh in.

“What jockey’s that?” he asked.

“That? Why, Docker!”

‘Jimmy’ stared. A short, square, bow-legged figure, with a hardwood
face! Waiting his chance, he went up to him and said:

“Docker, you ride my ’orse in the big race.”

“Mr. Shrewin?”

“The same,” said ‘Jimmy.’ The jockey’s left eyelid drooped a little.
Nothing responded in ‘Jimmy’s’ face. “I’ll see you before the race,” he
said.

Again the jockey’s eyelid wavered, he nodded and passed on.

‘Jimmy’ stared at his own boots--they struck him suddenly as too yellow
and not at the right angle. But why, he couldn’t say.

More horses now--those of the first race being unsaddled, clothed, and
led away. More men--three familiar figures: young ‘Cocoon’ and two
others of his Oxford customers.

‘Jimmy’ turned sharply from them. Stand their airs?--not he! He had a
sudden sickish feeling. With a win, he’d have been a made man--on his
own! Blast George Pulcher and his caution! To think of being back in
Oxford with those young bloods jeering at his beaten horse! He bit deep
into the stump of his cheroot, and suddenly came on Jenning standing by
a horse with a star on its bay forehead. The trainer gave him no sign
of recognition, but signed to the boy to lead the horse into a stall,
and followed, shutting the door. It was exactly as if he had said:
‘Vermin about!’

An evil little smile curled ‘Jimmy’s’ lips. The tyke!

The horses for the second race passed out of the paddock gate, and he
turned to find his own. His ferreting eyes soon sighted Polman. What
the cat-faced fellow knew, or was thinking, ‘Jimmy’ could not tell.
Nobody could tell.

“Where’s the mare?” he said.

“Just coming round.”

No mistaking her; fine as a star; shiny-coated, sinuous, her blazed
face held rather high! Who said she was ’shelly’? She was a picture! He
walked a few paces close to the boy.

“That’s Calliope.... H’m!... Nice filly!... Looks fit.... Who’s this
James Shrewin?... What’s she at?... I like her looks.”

His horse! Not a prettier filly in the world!

He followed Polman into her stall to see her saddled. In the twilight
there he watched her toilet; the rub-over; the exact adjustments; the
bottle of water to the mouth; the buckling of the bridle--watched her
head high above the boy keeping her steady with gentle pulls of a rein
in each hand held out a little wide, and now and then stroking her
blazed nose; watched her pretence of nipping at his hand: he watched
the beauty of her exaggerated in this half-lit isolation away from the
others, the life and litheness in her satin body, the wilful expectancy
in her bright soft eyes.

Run a bye! This bit o’ blood--this bit o’ fire! This horse of his!
Deep within that shell of blue box-cloth against the stall partition a
thought declared itself: ‘I’m ---- if she shall! She can beat the lot!
And she’s ---- well going to!’

The door was thrown open, and she led out. He moved alongside. They
were staring at her, following her. No wonder! She was a picture, his
horse--his! She had gone to ‘Jimmy’s’ head.

They passed Jenning with Diamond Stud waiting to be mounted. ‘Jimmy’
shot him a look. Let the ---- wait!

His mare reached the palings and was halted. ‘Jimmy’ saw the short
square figure of her jockey, in the new magenta cap and jacket--_his_
cap, _his_ jacket! Beautiful they looked, and no mistake!

“A word with you,” he said.

The jockey halted, looked quickly round.

“All right, Mr. Shrewin. No need.”

‘Jimmy’s’ eyes smouldered at him; hardly moving his lips, he said,
intently: “You ---- well don’t! You’ll ---- well ride her to win. Never
mind _him_! If you don’t, I’ll have you off the Turf. Understand me!
You’ll ---- well ride ’er to win.”

The jockey’s jaw dropped.

“All right, Mr. Shrewin.”

“See it is,” said ‘Jimmy’ with a hiss....

“Mount jockeys!”

He saw magenta swing into the saddle. And suddenly, as if smitten with
the plague, he scuttled away.


VI

He scuttled to where he could see them going down--seventeen. No
need to search for his colours; they blazed, like George Pulcher’s
countenance, or a rhododendron bush in sunlight, above that bright
chestnut with the white nose, curvetting a little as she was led past.

Now they came cantering--Deerstalker in the lead.

“He’s a hell of a horse, Deerstalker!” said someone behind.

‘Jimmy’ cast a nervous glance around. No sign of George Pulcher!

One by one they cantered past, and he watched them with a cold feeling
in his stomach. Still unused to sight of the creatures out of which he
made his living, they _all_ seemed to him hells of horses!

The same voice said:

“New colours! Well, you can see ’em, and the mare too. She’s a showy
one. Calliope? She’s goin’ back in the bettin’, though.”

‘Jimmy’ moved up through the Ring.

“Four to one on the field!” “Six Deerstalker!” “Sevens Magistrate!”
“Ten to one Wasp!” “Ten to one Calliope!” “Four to one Diamond
Stud--Four to one on the field!”

Steady as a rock, that horse of Jenning, and his own going back!

“Twelves Calliope!” he heard, just as he reached the stand. The
telepathic genius of the Ring missed nothing--almost!

A cold shiver went through him. What had he done by his words to
Docker? Spoiled the golden egg laid so carefully? But perhaps she
couldn’t win even if they let her! He began to mount the stand, his
mind in the most acute confusion.

A voice said: “Hullo, Jimmy! Is she going to win?”

One of his young Oxford sparks was jammed against him on the stairway!

He raised his lip in a sort of snarl, and, huddling himself, slipped
through and up ahead. He came out and edged in close to the stairs
where he could get play for his glasses. Behind him one of those who
improve the shining hour among backers cut off from opportunity was
intoning the odds a point shorter than below. “Three to one on the
field!” “Fives Deerstalker!” “Eight to one Wasp!”

“What price Calliope?” said ‘Jimmy’ sharply.

“Hundred to eight.”

“Done!” Handing him the eight, he took the ticket. Behind him the man’s
eyes moved fishily, and he resumed his incantation.

“Three to one on the field!... Three to one on the field! Six to one
Magistrate!”

On the wheeling bunch of colours at the start ‘Jimmy’ trained
his glasses. Something had broken clean away and come half the
course--something in yellow.

“Eights Magistrate. Nine to one Magistrate,” drifted up.

So they had spotted that! Precious little they didn’t spot!

Magistrate was round again, and being ridden back. ‘Jimmy’ rested
his glasses a moment, and looked down. Swarms in the Cheap Ring,
Tattersalls, the stands--a crowd so great you could lose George Pulcher
in it. Just below a little man was making silent, frantic signals
with his arms to someone across in the Cheap Ring. ‘Jimmy’ raised his
glasses. In line now--magenta third from the rails!

“They’re off!” The hush, you could cut it with a knife! Something in
green away on the right--Wasp! What a bat they were going! And a sort
of numbness in ‘Jimmy’s’ mind cracked suddenly; his glasses shook; his
thin, weasley face became suffused and quivered. Magenta--magenta--two
from the rails! He could make no story of the race such as he would
read in to-morrow’s paper--he could see nothing but magenta.

Out of the dip now, and coming fast--green still leading--something in
violet, something in tartan, closing.

“Wasp’s beat!” “The favourite--the favourite wins!”
“Deerstalker--Deerstalker wins! What’s that in pink on the rails?”

It was _his_ in pink on the rails! Behind him a man went suddenly mad.

“Deerstalker! Come on with ’im, Stee! Deerstalker’ll
win--Deerstalker’ll win!”

‘Jimmy’ sputtered venomously: “Will ’e? Will ’e?”

Deerstalker and his own out from the rest--opposite the Cheap
Ring--neck and neck--Docker riding like a demon.

“Deerstalker! Deerstalker!” “Calliope wins! She wins!”

Gawd! His horse! They flashed past--fifty yards to go, and not a head
between ’em!

“Deerstalker! Deerstalker!” “Calliope!”

He saw his mare shoot out--she’d won!

With a little queer sound he squirmed and wriggled on to the stairs. No
thoughts while he squeezed, and slid, and hurried--only emotion--out of
the Ring, away to the paddock. His horse!

Docker had weighed in when he reached the mare. All right! He passed
with a grin. ‘Jimmy’ turned almost into the body of Polman standing
like an image.

“Well, Mr. Shrewin,” he said to nobody, “she’s won.”

‘Damn you!’ thought ‘Jimmy.’ ‘Damn the lot of you!’ And he went up to
his mare. Quivering, streaked with sweat, impatient of the gathering
crowd, she showed the whites of her eyes when he put his hand up to her
nose.

“Good girl!” he said, and watched her led away.

‘Gawd! I want a drink!’ he thought.

Gingerly, keeping a sharp lookout for Pulcher, he returned to the
stand to get it, and to draw his hundred. But up there by the stairs
the discreet fellow was no more. On the ticket was the name O. H.
Jones, and nothing else. ‘Jimmy’ Shrewin had been welshed! He went down
at last in a bad temper. At the bottom of the staircase stood George
Pulcher. The big man’s face was crimson, his eyes ominous. He blocked
‘Jimmy’ into a corner.

“Ah!” he said. “You little crow! What the ’ell made you speak to
Docker?”

‘Jimmy’ grinned. Some new body within him stood there defiant. “She’s
my ’orse,” he said.

“You ---- Gawd-forsaken rat! If I ’ad you in a quiet spot, I’d shake
the life out of you!”

‘Jimmy’ stared up, his little spindle legs apart, like a cock-sparrow
confronting an offended pigeon.

“Go ’ome,” he said, “George Pulcher; and get your mother to mend your
socks. You don’t know ’ow! Thought I wasn’t a man, did you? Well, now
you ---- well know I am. Keep off my ’orse in future.”

Crimson rushed up on crimson in Pulcher’s face; he raised his heavy
fists. ‘Jimmy’ stood, unmoving, his little hands in his bell-coat
pockets, his withered face upraised. The big man gulped as if
swallowing back the tide of blood; his fists edged forward and
then--dropped.

“That’s better,” said ‘Jimmy,’ “hit one of your own size.”

Emitting a deep growl, George Pulcher walked away.

“Two to one on the field--I’ll back the field--Two to one on the
field.” “Threes Snowdrift--Fours Iron Dook.”

‘Jimmy’ stood a moment mechanically listening to the music of his life;
then, edging out, he took a fly and was driven to the station.

All the way up to town he sat chewing his cheroot with the glow of
drink inside him, thinking of that finish, and of how he had stood up
to George Pulcher. For a whole day he was lost in London, but Friday
saw him once more at his seat of custom in the ‘Corn.’ Not having laid
against his horse, he had had a good race in spite of everything; yet,
the following week, uncertain into what further quagmires of quixotry
she might lead him, he sold Calliope.

But for years betting upon horses that he never saw, underground like a
rat, yet never again so accessible to the kicks of fortune, or so prone
before the shafts of superiority, he would think of the Downs with the
blinkin’ larks singin’, and talk of how once he--had a horse.

1923.



***END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK CAPTURES***


******* This file should be named 65252-0.txt or 65252-0.zip *******


This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
http://www.gutenberg.org/dirs/6/5/2/5/65252


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for the eBooks, unless you receive
specific permission. If you do not charge anything for copies of this
eBook, complying with the rules is very easy. You may use this eBook
for nearly any purpose such as creation of derivative works, reports,
performances and research. They may be modified and printed and given
away--you may do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks
not protected by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the
trademark license, especially commercial redistribution.

START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the
person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph
1.E.8.

1.B. "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the
Foundation" or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg-tm License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg-tm work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country outside the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work
on which the phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

  This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
  most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no
  restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it
  under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this
  eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the
  United States, you'll have to check the laws of the country where you
  are located before using this ebook.

1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format
other than "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original "Plain
Vanilla ASCII" or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg-tm License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
provided that

* You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
  the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
  you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
  to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he has
  agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
  within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
  legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
  payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
  Section 4, "Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
  Literary Archive Foundation."

* You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
  you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
  does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
  License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
  copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
  all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg-tm
  works.

* You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
  any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
  electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
  receipt of the work.

* You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
  distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and The
Project Gutenberg Trademark LLC, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark. Contact the Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg-tm collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain "Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg-tm work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at
www.gutenberg.org 

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary 
Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is in Fairbanks, Alaska, with the
mailing address: PO Box 750175, Fairbanks, AK 99775, but its
volunteers and employees are scattered throughout numerous
locations. Its business office is located at 809 North 1500 West, Salt
Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up to
date contact information can be found at the Foundation's web site and
official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

For additional contact information:

    Dr. Gregory B. Newby
    Chief Executive and Director
    gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular
state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg-tm concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

